**The Project Gutenberg Etext of A Child's History of England**
#11 in our series by Charles Dickens


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


A Child's History of England

by Charles Dickens

October, 1996  [Etext #699]


**The Project Gutenberg Etext of A Child's History of England**
*****This file should be named achoe10.txt or achoe10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, achoe11.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, achoe10a.txt.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-two text
files per month:  or 400 more Etexts in 1996 for a total of 800.
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach 80 billion Etexts.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only 10% of the present number of computer users.  2001
should have at least twice as many computer users as that, so it
will require us reaching less than 5% of the users in 2001.


We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/BU":  and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law. (BU = Benedictine
University).  (Subscriptions to our paper newsletter go to BU.)

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext90 through /etext96
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET INDEX?00.GUT
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Benedictine University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association / Benedictine
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Benedictine University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





A Child's History of England by Charles Dickens
Scanned and Proofed by David Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk





A Child's History of England




CHAPTER I - ANCIENT ENGLAND AND THE ROMANS



IF you look at a Map of the World, you will see, in the left-hand 
upper corner of the Eastern Hemisphere, two Islands lying in the 
sea.  They are England and Scotland, and Ireland.  England and 
Scotland form the greater part of these Islands.  Ireland is the 
next in size.  The little neighbouring islands, which are so small 
upon the Map as to be mere dots, are chiefly little bits of 
Scotland, - broken off, I dare say, in the course of a great length 
of time, by the power of the restless water.

In the old days, a long, long while ago, before Our Saviour was 
born on earth and lay asleep in a manger, these Islands were in the 
same place, and the stormy sea roared round them, just as it roars 
now.  But the sea was not alive, then, with great ships and brave 
sailors, sailing to and from all parts of the world.  It was very 
lonely.  The Islands lay solitary, in the great expanse of water.  
The foaming waves dashed against their cliffs, and the bleak winds 
blew over their forests; but the winds and waves brought no 
adventurers to land upon the Islands, and the savage Islanders knew 
nothing of the rest of the world, and the rest of the world knew 
nothing of them.

It is supposed that the Phoenicians, who were an ancient people, 
famous for carrying on trade, came in ships to these Islands, and 
found that they produced tin and lead; both very useful things, as 
you know, and both produced to this very hour upon the sea-coast. 
The most celebrated tin mines in Cornwall are, still, close to the 
sea.  One of them, which I have seen, is so close to it that it is 
hollowed out underneath the ocean; and the miners say, that in 
stormy weather, when they are at work down in that deep place, they 
can hear the noise of the waves thundering above their heads.  So, 
the Phoenicians, coasting about the Islands, would come, without 
much difficulty, to where the tin and lead were.

The Phoenicians traded with the Islanders for these metals, and 
gave the Islanders some other useful things in exchange.  The 
Islanders were, at first, poor savages, going almost naked, or only 
dressed in the rough skins of beasts, and staining their bodies, as 
other savages do, with coloured earths and the juices of plants.  
But the Phoenicians, sailing over to the opposite coasts of France 
and Belgium, and saying to the people there, 'We have been to those 
white cliffs across the water, which you can see in fine weather, 
and from that country, which is called BRITAIN, we bring this tin 
and lead,' tempted some of the French and Belgians to come over 
also.  These people settled themselves on the south coast of 
England, which is now called Kent; and, although they were a rough 
people too, they taught the savage Britons some useful arts, and 
improved that part of the Islands.  It is probable that other 
people came over from Spain to Ireland, and settled there.

Thus, by little and little, strangers became mixed with the 
Islanders, and the savage Britons grew into a wild, bold people; 
almost savage, still, especially in the interior of the country 
away from the sea where the foreign settlers seldom went; but 
hardy, brave, and strong.

The whole country was covered with forests, and swamps.  The 
greater part of it was very misty and cold.  There were no roads, 
no bridges, no streets, no houses that you would think deserving of 
the name.  A town was nothing but a collection of straw-covered 
huts, hidden in a thick wood, with a ditch all round, and a low 
wall, made of mud, or the trunks of trees placed one upon another.  
The people planted little or no corn, but lived upon the flesh of 
their flocks and cattle.  They made no coins, but used metal rings 
for money.  They were clever in basket-work, as savage people often 
are; and they could make a coarse kind of cloth, and some very bad 
earthenware.  But in building fortresses they were much more 
clever.

They made boats of basket-work, covered with the skins of animals, 
but seldom, if ever, ventured far from the shore.  They made 
swords, of copper mixed with tin; but, these swords were of an 
awkward shape, and so soft that a heavy blow would bend one.  They 
made light shields, short pointed daggers, and spears - which they 
jerked back after they had thrown them at an enemy, by a long strip 
of leather fastened to the stem.  The butt-end was a rattle, to 
frighten an enemy's horse.  The ancient Britons, being divided into 
as many as thirty or forty tribes, each commanded by its own little 
king, were constantly fighting with one another, as savage people 
usually do; and they always fought with these weapons.

They were very fond of horses.  The standard of Kent was the 
picture of a white horse.  They could break them in and manage them 
wonderfully well.  Indeed, the horses (of which they had an 
abundance, though they were rather small) were so well taught in 
those days, that they can scarcely be said to have improved since; 
though the men are so much wiser.  They understood, and obeyed, 
every word of command; and would stand still by themselves, in all 
the din and noise of battle, while their masters went to fight on 
foot.  The Britons could not have succeeded in their most 
remarkable art, without the aid of these sensible and trusty 
animals.  The art I mean, is the construction and management of 
war-chariots or cars, for which they have ever been celebrated in 
history.  Each of the best sort of these chariots, not quite breast 
high in front, and open at the back, contained one man to drive, 
and two or three others to fight - all standing up.  The horses who 
drew them were so well trained, that they would tear, at full 
gallop, over the most stony ways, and even through the woods; 
dashing down their masters' enemies beneath their hoofs, and 
cutting them to pieces with the blades of swords, or scythes, which 
were fastened to the wheels, and stretched out beyond the car on 
each side, for that cruel purpose.  In a moment, while at full 
speed, the horses would stop, at the driver's command.  The men 
within would leap out, deal blows about them with their swords like 
hail, leap on the horses, on the pole, spring back into the 
chariots anyhow; and, as soon as they were safe, the horses tore 
away again.

The Britons had a strange and terrible religion, called the 
Religion of the Druids.  It seems to have been brought over, in 
very early times indeed, from the opposite country of France, 
anciently called Gaul, and to have mixed up the worship of the 
Serpent, and of the Sun and Moon, with the worship of some of the 
Heathen Gods and Goddesses.  Most of its ceremonies were kept 
secret by the priests, the Druids, who pretended to be enchanters, 
and who carried magicians' wands, and wore, each of them, about his 
neck, what he told the ignorant people was a Serpent's egg in a 
golden case.  But it is certain that the Druidical ceremonies 
included the sacrifice of human victims, the torture of some 
suspected criminals, and, on particular occasions, even the burning 
alive, in immense wicker cages, of a number of men and animals 
together.  The Druid Priests had some kind of veneration for the 
Oak, and for the mistletoe - the same plant that we hang up in 
houses at Christmas Time now - when its white berries grew upon the 
Oak.  They met together in dark woods, which they called Sacred 
Groves; and there they instructed, in their mysterious arts, young 
men who came to them as pupils, and who sometimes stayed with them 
as long as twenty years.

These Druids built great Temples and altars, open to the sky, 
fragments of some of which are yet remaining.  Stonehenge, on 
Salisbury Plain, in Wiltshire, is the most extraordinary of these.  
Three curious stones, called Kits Coty House, on Bluebell Hill, 
near Maidstone, in Kent, form another.  We know, from examination 
of the great blocks of which such buildings are made, that they 
could not have been raised without the aid of some ingenious 
machines, which are common now, but which the ancient Britons 
certainly did not use in making their own uncomfortable houses.  I 
should not wonder if the Druids, and their pupils who stayed with 
them twenty years, knowing more than the rest of the Britons, kept 
the people out of sight while they made these buildings, and then 
pretended that they built them by magic.  Perhaps they had a hand 
in the fortresses too; at all events, as they were very powerful, 
and very much believed in, and as they made and executed the laws, 
and paid no taxes, I don't wonder that they liked their trade.  
And, as they persuaded the people the more Druids there were, the 
better off the people would be, I don't wonder that there were a 
good many of them.  But it is pleasant to think that there are no 
Druids, NOW, who go on in that way, and pretend to carry 
Enchanters' Wands and Serpents' Eggs - and of course there is 
nothing of the kind, anywhere.

Such was the improved condition of the ancient Britons, fifty-five 
years before the birth of Our Saviour, when the Romans, under their 
great General, Julius Caesar, were masters of all the rest of the 
known world.  Julius Caesar had then just conquered Gaul; and 
hearing, in Gaul, a good deal about the opposite Island with the 
white cliffs, and about the bravery of the Britons who inhabited it 
- some of whom had been fetched over to help the Gauls in the war 
against him - he resolved, as he was so near, to come and conquer 
Britain next.

So, Julius Caesar came sailing over to this Island of ours, with 
eighty vessels and twelve thousand men.  And he came from the 
French coast between Calais and Boulogne, 'because thence was the 
shortest passage into Britain;' just for the same reason as our 
steam-boats now take the same track, every day.  He expected to 
conquer Britain easily:  but it was not such easy work as he 
supposed - for the bold Britons fought most bravely; and, what with 
not having his horse-soldiers with him (for they had been driven 
back by a storm), and what with having some of his vessels dashed 
to pieces by a high tide after they were drawn ashore, he ran great 
risk of being totally defeated.  However, for once that the bold 
Britons beat him, he beat them twice; though not so soundly but 
that he was very glad to accept their proposals of peace, and go 
away.

But, in the spring of the next year, he came back; this time, with 
eight hundred vessels and thirty thousand men.  The British tribes 
chose, as their general-in-chief, a Briton, whom the Romans in 
their Latin language called CASSIVELLAUNUS, but whose British name 
is supposed to have been CASWALLON.  A brave general he was, and 
well he and his soldiers fought the Roman army!  So well, that 
whenever in that war the Roman soldiers saw a great cloud of dust, 
and heard the rattle of the rapid British chariots, they trembled 
in their hearts.  Besides a number of smaller battles, there was a 
battle fought near Canterbury, in Kent; there was a battle fought 
near Chertsey, in Surrey; there was a battle fought near a marshy 
little town in a wood, the capital of that part of Britain which 
belonged to CASSIVELLAUNUS, and which was probably near what is now 
Saint Albans, in Hertfordshire.  However, brave CASSIVELLAUNUS had 
the worst of it, on the whole; though he and his men always fought 
like lions.  As the other British chiefs were jealous of him, and 
were always quarrelling with him, and with one another, he gave up, 
and proposed peace.  Julius Caesar was very glad to grant peace 
easily, and to go away again with all his remaining ships and men.  
He had expected to find pearls in Britain, and he may have found a 
few for anything I know; but, at all events, he found delicious 
oysters, and I am sure he found tough Britons - of whom, I dare 
say, he made the same complaint as Napoleon Bonaparte the great 
French General did, eighteen hundred years afterwards, when he said 
they were such unreasonable fellows that they never knew when they 
were beaten.  They never DID know, I believe, and never will.

Nearly a hundred years passed on, and all that time, there was 
peace in Britain.  The Britons improved their towns and mode of 
life:  became more civilised, travelled, and learnt a great deal 
from the Gauls and Romans.  At last, the Roman Emperor, Claudius, 
sent AULUS PLAUTIUS, a skilful general, with a mighty force, to 
subdue the Island, and shortly afterwards arrived himself.  They 
did little; and OSTORIUS SCAPULA, another general, came.  Some of 
the British Chiefs of Tribes submitted.  Others resolved to fight 
to the death.  Of these brave men, the bravest was CARACTACUS, or 
CARADOC, who gave battle to the Romans, with his army, among the 
mountains of North Wales.  'This day,' said he to his soldiers, 
'decides the fate of Britain!  Your liberty, or your eternal 
slavery, dates from this hour.  Remember your brave ancestors, who 
drove the great Caesar himself across the sea!'  On hearing these 
words, his men, with a great shout, rushed upon the Romans.  But 
the strong Roman swords and armour were too much for the weaker 
British weapons in close conflict.  The Britons lost the day.  The 
wife and daughter of the brave CARACTACUS were taken prisoners; his 
brothers delivered themselves up; he himself was betrayed into the 
hands of the Romans by his false and base stepmother:  and they 
carried him, and all his family, in triumph to Rome.

But a great man will be great in misfortune, great in prison, great 
in chains.  His noble air, and dignified endurance of distress, so 
touched the Roman people who thronged the streets to see him, that 
he and his family were restored to freedom.  No one knows whether 
his great heart broke, and he died in Rome, or whether he ever 
returned to his own dear country.  English oaks have grown up from 
acorns, and withered away, when they were hundreds of years old - 
and other oaks have sprung up in their places, and died too, very 
aged - since the rest of the history of the brave CARACTACUS was 
forgotten.

Still, the Britons WOULD NOT yield.  They rose again and again, and 
died by thousands, sword in hand.  They rose, on every possible 
occasion.  SUETONIUS, another Roman general, came, and stormed the 
Island of Anglesey (then called MONA), which was supposed to be 
sacred, and he burnt the Druids in their own wicker cages, by their 
own fires.  But, even while he was in Britain, with his victorious 
troops, the BRITONS rose.  Because BOADICEA, a British queen, the 
widow of the King of the Norfolk and Suffolk people, resisted the 
plundering of her property by the Romans who were settled in 
England, she was scourged, by order of CATUS a Roman officer; and 
her two daughters were shamefully insulted in her presence, and her 
husband's relations were made slaves.  To avenge this injury, the 
Britons rose, with all their might and rage.  They drove CATUS into 
Gaul; they laid the Roman possessions waste; they forced the Romans 
out of London, then a poor little town, but a trading place; they 
hanged, burnt, crucified, and slew by the sword, seventy thousand 
Romans in a few days.  SUETONIUS strengthened his army, and 
advanced to give them battle.  They strengthened their army, and 
desperately attacked his, on the field where it was strongly 
posted.  Before the first charge of the Britons was made, BOADICEA, 
in a war-chariot, with her fair hair streaming in the wind, and her 
injured daughters lying at her feet, drove among the troops, and 
cried to them for vengeance on their oppressors, the licentious 
Romans.  The Britons fought to the last; but they were vanquished 
with great slaughter, and the unhappy queen took poison.

Still, the spirit of the Britons was not broken.  When SUETONIUS 
left the country, they fell upon his troops, and retook the Island 
of Anglesey.  AGRICOLA came, fifteen or twenty years afterwards, 
and retook it once more, and devoted seven years to subduing the 
country, especially that part of it which is now called SCOTLAND; 
but, its people, the Caledonians, resisted him at every inch of 
ground.  They fought the bloodiest battles with him; they killed 
their very wives and children, to prevent his making prisoners of 
them; they fell, fighting, in such great numbers that certain hills 
in Scotland are yet supposed to be vast heaps of stones piled up 
above their graves.  HADRIAN came, thirty years afterwards, and 
still they resisted him.  SEVERUS came, nearly a hundred years 
afterwards, and they worried his great army like dogs, and rejoiced 
to see them die, by thousands, in the bogs and swamps.  CARACALLA, 
the son and successor of SEVERUS, did the most to conquer them, for 
a time; but not by force of arms.  He knew how little that would 
do.  He yielded up a quantity of land to the Caledonians, and gave 
the Britons the same privileges as the Romans possessed.  There was 
peace, after this, for seventy years.

Then new enemies arose.  They were the Saxons, a fierce, sea-faring 
people from the countries to the North of the Rhine, the great 
river of Germany on the banks of which the best grapes grow to make 
the German wine.  They began to come, in pirate ships, to the sea-
coast of Gaul and Britain, and to plunder them.  They were repulsed 
by CARAUSIUS, a native either of Belgium or of Britain, who was 
appointed by the Romans to the command, and under whom the Britons 
first began to fight upon the sea.  But, after this time, they 
renewed their ravages.  A few years more, and the Scots (which was 
then the name for the people of Ireland), and the Picts, a northern 
people, began to make frequent plundering incursions into the South 
of Britain.  All these attacks were repeated, at intervals, during 
two hundred years, and through a long succession of Roman Emperors 
and chiefs; during all which length of time, the Britons rose 
against the Romans, over and over again.  At last, in the days of 
the Roman HONORIUS, when the Roman power all over the world was 
fast declining, and when Rome wanted all her soldiers at home, the 
Romans abandoned all hope of conquering Britain, and went away.  
And still, at last, as at first, the Britons rose against them, in 
their old brave manner; for, a very little while before, they had 
turned away the Roman magistrates, and declared themselves an 
independent people.

Five hundred years had passed, since Julius Caesar's first invasion 
of the Island, when the Romans departed from it for ever.  In the 
course of that time, although they had been the cause of terrible 
fighting and bloodshed, they had done much to improve the condition 
of the Britons.  They had made great military roads; they had built 
forts; they had taught them how to dress, and arm themselves, much 
better than they had ever known how to do before; they had refined 
the whole British way of living.  AGRICOLA had built a great wall 
of earth, more than seventy miles long, extending from Newcastle to 
beyond Carlisle, for the purpose of keeping out the Picts and 
Scots; HADRIAN had strengthened it; SEVERUS, finding it much in 
want of repair, had built it afresh of stone.

Above all, it was in the Roman time, and by means of Roman ships, 
that the Christian Religion was first brought into Britain, and its 
people first taught the great lesson that, to be good in the sight 
of GOD, they must love their neighbours as themselves, and do unto 
others as they would be done by.  The Druids declared that it was 
very wicked to believe in any such thing, and cursed all the people 
who did believe it, very heartily.  But, when the people found that 
they were none the better for the blessings of the Druids, and none 
the worse for the curses of the Druids, but, that the sun shone and 
the rain fell without consulting the Druids at all, they just began 
to think that the Druids were mere men, and that it signified very 
little whether they cursed or blessed.  After which, the pupils of 
the Druids fell off greatly in numbers, and the Druids took to 
other trades.

Thus I have come to the end of the Roman time in England.  It is 
but little that is known of those five hundred years; but some 
remains of them are still found.  Often, when labourers are digging 
up the ground, to make foundations for houses or churches, they 
light on rusty money that once belonged to the Romans.  Fragments 
of plates from which they ate, of goblets from which they drank, 
and of pavement on which they trod, are discovered among the earth 
that is broken by the plough, or the dust that is crumbled by the 
gardener's spade.  Wells that the Romans sunk, still yield water; 
roads that the Romans made, form part of our highways.  In some old 
battle-fields, British spear-heads and Roman armour have been 
found, mingled together in decay, as they fell in the thick 
pressure of the fight.  Traces of Roman camps overgrown with grass, 
and of mounds that are the burial-places of heaps of Britons, are 
to be seen in almost all parts of the country.  Across the bleak 
moors of Northumberland, the wall of SEVERUS, overrun with moss and 
weeds, still stretches, a strong ruin; and the shepherds and their 
dogs lie sleeping on it in the summer weather.  On Salisbury Plain, 
Stonehenge yet stands:  a monument of the earlier time when the 
Roman name was unknown in Britain, and when the Druids, with their 
best magic wands, could not have written it in the sands of the 
wild sea-shore.



CHAPTER II - ANCIENT ENGLAND UNDER THE EARLY SAXONS



THE Romans had scarcely gone away from Britain, when the Britons 
began to wish they had never left it.  For, the Romans being gone, 
and the Britons being much reduced in numbers by their long wars, 
the Picts and Scots came pouring in, over the broken and unguarded 
wall of SEVERUS, in swarms.  They plundered the richest towns, and 
killed the people; and came back so often for more booty and more 
slaughter, that the unfortunate Britons lived a life of terror.  As 
if the Picts and Scots were not bad enough on land, the Saxons 
attacked the islanders by sea; and, as if something more were still 
wanting to make them miserable, they quarrelled bitterly among 
themselves as to what prayers they ought to say, and how they ought 
to say them.  The priests, being very angry with one another on 
these questions, cursed one another in the heartiest manner; and 
(uncommonly like the old Druids) cursed all the people whom they 
could not persuade.  So, altogether, the Britons were very badly 
off, you may believe.

They were in such distress, in short, that they sent a letter to 
Rome entreating help - which they called the Groans of the Britons; 
and in which they said, 'The barbarians chase us into the sea, the 
sea throws us back upon the barbarians, and we have only the hard 
choice left us of perishing by the sword, or perishing by the 
waves.'  But, the Romans could not help them, even if they were so 
inclined; for they had enough to do to defend themselves against 
their own enemies, who were then very fierce and strong.  At last, 
the Britons, unable to bear their hard condition any longer, 
resolved to make peace with the Saxons, and to invite the Saxons to 
come into their country, and help them to keep out the Picts and 
Scots.

It was a British Prince named VORTIGERN who took this resolution, 
and who made a treaty of friendship with HENGIST and HORSA, two 
Saxon chiefs.  Both of these names, in the old Saxon language, 
signify Horse; for the Saxons, like many other nations in a rough 
state, were fond of giving men the names of animals, as Horse, 
Wolf, Bear, Hound.  The Indians of North America, - a very inferior 
people to the Saxons, though - do the same to this day.

HENGIST and HORSA drove out the Picts and Scots; and VORTIGERN, 
being grateful to them for that service, made no opposition to 
their settling themselves in that part of England which is called 
the Isle of Thanet, or to their inviting over more of their 
countrymen to join them.  But HENGIST had a beautiful daughter 
named ROWENA; and when, at a feast, she filled a golden goblet to 
the brim with wine, and gave it to VORTIGERN, saying in a sweet 
voice, 'Dear King, thy health!' the King fell in love with her.  My 
opinion is, that the cunning HENGIST meant him to do so, in order 
that the Saxons might have greater influence with him; and that the 
fair ROWENA came to that feast, golden goblet and all, on purpose.

At any rate, they were married; and, long afterwards, whenever the 
King was angry with the Saxons, or jealous of their encroachments, 
ROWENA would put her beautiful arms round his neck, and softly say, 
'Dear King, they are my people!  Be favourable to them, as you 
loved that Saxon girl who gave you the golden goblet of wine at the 
feast!'  And, really, I don't see how the King could help himself.

Ah!  We must all die!  In the course of years, VORTIGERN died - he 
was dethroned, and put in prison, first, I am afraid; and ROWENA 
died; and generations of Saxons and Britons died; and events that 
happened during a long, long time, would have been quite forgotten 
but for the tales and songs of the old Bards, who used to go about 
from feast to feast, with their white beards, recounting the deeds 
of their forefathers.  Among the histories of which they sang and 
talked, there was a famous one, concerning the bravery and virtues 
of KING ARTHUR, supposed to have been a British Prince in those old 
times.  But, whether such a person really lived, or whether there 
were several persons whose histories came to be confused together 
under that one name, or whether all about him was invention, no one 
knows.

I will tell you, shortly, what is most interesting in the early 
Saxon times, as they are described in these songs and stories of 
the Bards.

In, and long after, the days of VORTIGERN, fresh bodies of Saxons, 
under various chiefs, came pouring into Britain.  One body, 
conquering the Britons in the East, and settling there, called 
their kingdom Essex; another body settled in the West, and called 
their kingdom Wessex; the Northfolk, or Norfolk people, established 
themselves in one place; the Southfolk, or Suffolk people, 
established themselves in another; and gradually seven kingdoms or 
states arose in England, which were called the Saxon Heptarchy.  
The poor Britons, falling back before these crowds of fighting men 
whom they had innocently invited over as friends, retired into 
Wales and the adjacent country; into Devonshire, and into Cornwall.  
Those parts of England long remained unconquered.  And in Cornwall 
now - where the sea-coast is very gloomy, steep, and rugged - 
where, in the dark winter-time, ships have often been wrecked close 
to the land, and every soul on board has perished - where the winds 
and waves howl drearily and split the solid rocks into arches and 
caverns - there are very ancient ruins, which the people call the 
ruins of KING ARTHUR'S Castle.

Kent is the most famous of the seven Saxon kingdoms, because the 
Christian religion was preached to the Saxons there (who domineered 
over the Britons too much, to care for what THEY said about their 
religion, or anything else) by AUGUSTINE, a monk from Rome.  KING 
ETHELBERT, of Kent, was soon converted; and the moment he said he 
was a Christian, his courtiers all said THEY were Christians; after 
which, ten thousand of his subjects said they were Christians too.  
AUGUSTINE built a little church, close to this King's palace, on 
the ground now occupied by the beautiful cathedral of Canterbury.  
SEBERT, the King's nephew, built on a muddy marshy place near 
London, where there had been a temple to Apollo, a church dedicated 
to Saint Peter, which is now Westminster Abbey.  And, in London 
itself, on the foundation of a temple to Diana, he built another 
little church which has risen up, since that old time, to be Saint 
Paul's.

After the death of ETHELBERT, EDWIN, King of Northumbria, who was 
such a good king that it was said a woman or child might openly 
carry a purse of gold, in his reign, without fear, allowed his 
child to be baptised, and held a great council to consider whether 
he and his people should all be Christians or not.  It was decided 
that they should be.  COIFI, the chief priest of the old religion, 
made a great speech on the occasion.  In this discourse, he told 
the people that he had found out the old gods to be impostors.  'I 
am quite satisfied of it,' he said.  'Look at me!  I have been 
serving them all my life, and they have done nothing for me; 
whereas, if they had been really powerful, they could not have 
decently done less, in return for all I have done for them, than 
make my fortune.  As they have never made my fortune, I am quite 
convinced they are impostors!'  When this singular priest had 
finished speaking, he hastily armed himself with sword and lance, 
mounted a war-horse, rode at a furious gallop in sight of all the 
people to the temple, and flung his lance against it as an insult.  
From that time, the Christian religion spread itself among the 
Saxons, and became their faith.

The next very famous prince was EGBERT.  He lived about a hundred 
and fifty years afterwards, and claimed to have a better right to 
the throne of Wessex than BEORTRIC, another Saxon prince who was at 
the head of that kingdom, and who married EDBURGA, the daughter of 
OFFA, king of another of the seven kingdoms.  This QUEEN EDBURGA 
was a handsome murderess, who poisoned people when they offended 
her.  One day, she mixed a cup of poison for a certain noble 
belonging to the court; but her husband drank of it too, by 
mistake, and died.  Upon this, the people revolted, in great 
crowds; and running to the palace, and thundering at the gates, 
cried, 'Down with the wicked queen, who poisons men!'  They drove 
her out of the country, and abolished the title she had disgraced.  
When years had passed away, some travellers came home from Italy, 
and said that in the town of Pavia they had seen a ragged beggar-
woman, who had once been handsome, but was then shrivelled, bent, 
and yellow, wandering about the streets, crying for bread; and that 
this beggar-woman was the poisoning English queen.  It was, indeed, 
EDBURGA; and so she died, without a shelter for her wretched head.

EGBERT, not considering himself safe in England, in consequence of 
his having claimed the crown of Wessex (for he thought his rival 
might take him prisoner and put him to death), sought refuge at the 
court of CHARLEMAGNE, King of France.  On the death of BEORTRIC, so 
unhappily poisoned by mistake, EGBERT came back to Britain; 
succeeded to the throne of Wessex; conquered some of the other 
monarchs of the seven kingdoms; added their territories to his own; 
and, for the first time, called the country over which he ruled, 
ENGLAND.

And now, new enemies arose, who, for a long time, troubled England 
sorely.  These were the Northmen, the people of Denmark and Norway, 
whom the English called the Danes.  They were a warlike people, 
quite at home upon the sea; not Christians; very daring and cruel.  
They came over in ships, and plundered and burned wheresoever they 
landed.  Once, they beat EGBERT in battle.  Once, EGBERT beat them.  
But, they cared no more for being beaten than the English 
themselves.  In the four following short reigns, of ETHELWULF, and 
his sons, ETHELBALD, ETHELBERT, and ETHELRED, they came back, over 
and over again, burning and plundering, and laying England waste.  
In the last-mentioned reign, they seized EDMUND, King of East 
England, and bound him to a tree.  Then, they proposed to him that 
he should change his religion; but he, being a good Christian, 
steadily refused.  Upon that, they beat him, made cowardly jests 
upon him, all defenceless as he was, shot arrows at him, and, 
finally, struck off his head.  It is impossible to say whose head 
they might have struck off next, but for the death of KING ETHELRED 
from a wound he had received in fighting against them, and the 
succession to his throne of the best and wisest king that ever 
lived in England.



CHAPTER III - ENGLAND UNDER THE GOOD SAXON, ALFRED



ALFRED THE GREAT was a young man, three-and-twenty years of age, 
when he became king.  Twice in his childhood, he had been taken to 
Rome, where the Saxon nobles were in the habit of going on journeys 
which they supposed to be religious; and, once, he had stayed for 
some time in Paris.  Learning, however, was so little cared for, 
then, that at twelve years old he had not been taught to read; 
although, of the sons of KING ETHELWULF, he, the youngest, was the 
favourite.  But he had - as most men who grow up to be great and 
good are generally found to have had - an excellent mother; and, 
one day, this lady, whose name was OSBURGA, happened, as she was 
sitting among her sons, to read a book of Saxon poetry.  The art of 
printing was not known until long and long after that period, and 
the book, which was written, was what is called 'illuminated,' with 
beautiful bright letters, richly painted.  The brothers admiring it 
very much, their mother said, 'I will give it to that one of you 
four princes who first learns to read.'  ALFRED sought out a tutor 
that very day, applied himself to learn with great diligence, and 
soon won the book.  He was proud of it, all his life.

This great king, in the first year of his reign, fought nine 
battles with the Danes.  He made some treaties with them too, by 
which the false Danes swore they would quit the country.  They 
pretended to consider that they had taken a very solemn oath, in 
swearing this upon the holy bracelets that they wore, and which 
were always buried with them when they died; but they cared little 
for it, for they thought nothing of breaking oaths and treaties 
too, as soon as it suited their purpose, and coming back again to 
fight, plunder, and burn, as usual.  One fatal winter, in the 
fourth year of KING ALFRED'S reign, they spread themselves in great 
numbers over the whole of England; and so dispersed and routed the 
King's soldiers that the King was left alone, and was obliged to 
disguise himself as a common peasant, and to take refuge in the 
cottage of one of his cowherds who did not know his face.

Here, KING ALFRED, while the Danes sought him far and near, was 
left alone one day, by the cowherd's wife, to watch some cakes 
which she put to bake upon the hearth.  But, being at work upon his 
bow and arrows, with which he hoped to punish the false Danes when 
a brighter time should come, and thinking deeply of his poor 
unhappy subjects whom the Danes chased through the land, his noble 
mind forgot the cakes, and they were burnt.  'What!' said the 
cowherd's wife, who scolded him well when she came back, and little 
thought she was scolding the King, 'you will be ready enough to eat 
them by-and-by, and yet you cannot watch them, idle dog?'

At length, the Devonshire men made head against a new host of Danes 
who landed on their coast; killed their chief, and captured their 
flag; on which was represented the likeness of a Raven - a very fit 
bird for a thievish army like that, I think.  The loss of their 
standard troubled the Danes greatly, for they believed it to be 
enchanted - woven by the three daughters of one father in a single 
afternoon - and they had a story among themselves that when they 
were victorious in battle, the Raven stretched his wings and seemed 
to fly; and that when they were defeated, he would droop.  He had 
good reason to droop, now, if he could have done anything half so 
sensible; for, KING ALFRED joined the Devonshire men; made a camp 
with them on a piece of firm ground in the midst of a bog in 
Somersetshire; and prepared for a great attempt for vengeance on 
the Danes, and the deliverance of his oppressed people.

But, first, as it was important to know how numerous those 
pestilent Danes were, and how they were fortified, KING ALFRED, 
being a good musician, disguised himself as a glee-man or minstrel, 
and went, with his harp, to the Danish camp.  He played and sang in 
the very tent of GUTHRUM the Danish leader, and entertained the 
Danes as they caroused.  While he seemed to think of nothing but 
his music, he was watchful of their tents, their arms, their 
discipline, everything that he desired to know.  And right soon did 
this great king entertain them to a different tune; for, summoning 
all his true followers to meet him at an appointed place, where 
they received him with joyful shouts and tears, as the monarch whom 
many of them had given up for lost or dead, he put himself at their 
head, marched on the Danish camp, defeated the Danes with great 
slaughter, and besieged them for fourteen days to prevent their 
escape.  But, being as merciful as he was good and brave, he then, 
instead of killing them, proposed peace:  on condition that they 
should altogether depart from that Western part of England, and 
settle in the East; and that GUTHRUM should become a Christian, in 
remembrance of the Divine religion which now taught his conqueror, 
the noble ALFRED, to forgive the enemy who had so often injured 
him.  This, GUTHRUM did.  At his baptism, KING ALFRED was his 
godfather.  And GUTHRUM was an honourable chief who well deserved 
that clemency; for, ever afterwards he was loyal and faithful to 
the king.  The Danes under him were faithful too.  They plundered 
and burned no more, but worked like honest men.  They ploughed, and 
sowed, and reaped, and led good honest English lives.  And I hope 
the children of those Danes played, many a time, with Saxon 
children in the sunny fields; and that Danish young men fell in 
love with Saxon girls, and married them; and that English 
travellers, benighted at the doors of Danish cottages, often went 
in for shelter until morning; and that Danes and Saxons sat by the 
red fire, friends, talking of KING ALFRED THE GREAT.

All the Danes were not like these under GUTHRUM; for, after some 
years, more of them came over, in the old plundering and burning 
way - among them a fierce pirate of the name of HASTINGS, who had 
the boldness to sail up the Thames to Gravesend, with eighty ships.  
For three years, there was a war with these Danes; and there was a 
famine in the country, too, and a plague, both upon human creatures 
and beasts.  But KING ALFRED, whose mighty heart never failed him, 
built large ships nevertheless, with which to pursue the pirates on 
the sea; and he encouraged his soldiers, by his brave example, to 
fight valiantly against them on the shore.  At last, he drove them 
all away; and then there was repose in England.

As great and good in peace, as he was great and good in war, KING 
ALFRED never rested from his labours to improve his people.  He 
loved to talk with clever men, and with travellers from foreign 
countries, and to write down what they told him, for his people to 
read.  He had studied Latin after learning to read English, and now 
another of his labours was, to translate Latin books into the 
English-Saxon tongue, that his people might be interested, and 
improved by their contents.  He made just laws, that they might 
live more happily and freely; he turned away all partial judges, 
that no wrong might be done them; he was so careful of their 
property, and punished robbers so severely, that it was a common 
thing to say that under the great KING ALFRED, garlands of golden 
chains and jewels might have hung across the streets, and no man 
would have touched one.  He founded schools; he patiently heard 
causes himself in his Court of Justice; the great desires of his 
heart were, to do right to all his subjects, and to leave England 
better, wiser, happier in all ways, than he found it.  His industry 
in these efforts was quite astonishing.  Every day he divided into 
certain portions, and in each portion devoted himself to a certain 
pursuit.  That he might divide his time exactly, he had wax torches 
or candles made, which were all of the same size, were notched 
across at regular distances, and were always kept burning.  Thus, 
as the candles burnt down, he divided the day into notches, almost 
as accurately as we now divide it into hours upon the clock.  But 
when the candles were first invented, it was found that the wind 
and draughts of air, blowing into the palace through the doors and 
windows, and through the chinks in the walls, caused them to gutter 
and burn unequally.  To prevent this, the King had them put into 
cases formed of wood and white horn.  And these were the first 
lanthorns ever made in England.

All this time, he was afflicted with a terrible unknown disease, 
which caused him violent and frequent pain that nothing could 
relieve.  He bore it, as he had borne all the troubles of his life, 
like a brave good man, until he was fifty-three years old; and 
then, having reigned thirty years, he died.  He died in the year 
nine hundred and one; but, long ago as that is, his fame, and the 
love and gratitude with which his subjects regarded him, are 
freshly remembered to the present hour.

In the next reign, which was the reign of EDWARD, surnamed THE 
ELDER, who was chosen in council to succeed, a nephew of KING 
ALFRED troubled the country by trying to obtain the throne.  The 
Danes in the East of England took part with this usurper (perhaps 
because they had honoured his uncle so much, and honoured him for 
his uncle's sake), and there was hard fighting; but, the King, with 
the assistance of his sister, gained the day, and reigned in peace 
for four and twenty years.  He gradually extended his power over 
the whole of England, and so the Seven Kingdoms were united into 
one.

When England thus became one kingdom, ruled over by one Saxon king, 
the Saxons had been settled in the country more than four hundred 
and fifty years.  Great changes had taken place in its customs 
during that time.  The Saxons were still greedy eaters and great 
drinkers, and their feasts were often of a noisy and drunken kind; 
but many new comforts and even elegances had become known, and were 
fast increasing.  Hangings for the walls of rooms, where, in these 
modern days, we paste up paper, are known to have been sometimes 
made of silk, ornamented with birds and flowers in needlework.  
Tables and chairs were curiously carved in different woods; were 
sometimes decorated with gold or silver; sometimes even made of 
those precious metals.  Knives and spoons were used at table; 
golden ornaments were worn - with silk and cloth, and golden 
tissues and embroideries; dishes were made of gold and silver, 
brass and bone.  There were varieties of drinking-horns, bedsteads, 
musical instruments.  A harp was passed round, at a feast, like the 
drinking-bowl, from guest to guest; and each one usually sang or 
played when his turn came.  The weapons of the Saxons were stoutly 
made, and among them was a terrible iron hammer that gave deadly 
blows, and was long remembered.  The Saxons themselves were a 
handsome people.  The men were proud of their long fair hair, 
parted on the forehead; their ample beards, their fresh 
complexions, and clear eyes.  The beauty of the Saxon women filled 
all England with a new delight and grace.

I have more to tell of the Saxons yet, but I stop to say this now, 
because under the GREAT ALFRED, all the best points of the English-
Saxon character were first encouraged, and in him first shown.  It 
has been the greatest character among the nations of the earth.  
Wherever the descendants of the Saxon race have gone, have sailed, 
or otherwise made their way, even to the remotest regions of the 
world, they have been patient, persevering, never to be broken in 
spirit, never to be turned aside from enterprises on which they 
have resolved.  In Europe, Asia, Africa, America, the whole world 
over; in the desert, in the forest, on the sea; scorched by a 
burning sun, or frozen by ice that never melts; the Saxon blood 
remains unchanged.  Wheresoever that race goes, there, law, and 
industry, and safety for life and property, and all the great 
results of steady perseverance, are certain to arise.

I pause to think with admiration, of the noble king who, in his 
single person, possessed all the Saxon virtues.  Whom misfortune 
could not subdue, whom prosperity could not spoil, whose 
perseverance nothing could shake.  Who was hopeful in defeat, and 
generous in success.  Who loved justice, freedom, truth, and 
knowledge.  Who, in his care to instruct his people, probably did 
more to preserve the beautiful old Saxon language, than I can 
imagine.  Without whom, the English tongue in which I tell this 
story might have wanted half its meaning.  As it is said that his 
spirit still inspires some of our best English laws, so, let you 
and I pray that it may animate our English hearts, at least to this 
- to resolve, when we see any of our fellow-creatures left in 
ignorance, that we will do our best, while life is in us, to have 
them taught; and to tell those rulers whose duty it is to teach 
them, and who neglect their duty, that they have profited very 
little by all the years that have rolled away since the year nine 
hundred and one, and that they are far behind the bright example of 
KING ALFRED THE GREAT.



CHAPTER IV - ENGLAND UNDER ATHELSTAN AND THE SIX BOY-KINGS



ATHELSTAN, the son of Edward the Elder, succeeded that king.  He 
reigned only fifteen years; but he remembered the glory of his 
grandfather, the great Alfred, and governed England well.  He 
reduced the turbulent people of Wales, and obliged them to pay him 
a tribute in money, and in cattle, and to send him their best hawks 
and hounds.  He was victorious over the Cornish men, who were not 
yet quite under the Saxon government.  He restored such of the old 
laws as were good, and had fallen into disuse; made some wise new 
laws, and took care of the poor and weak.  A strong alliance, made 
against him by ANLAF a Danish prince, CONSTANTINE King of the 
Scots, and the people of North Wales, he broke and defeated in one 
great battle, long famous for the vast numbers slain in it.  After 
that, he had a quiet reign; the lords and ladies about him had 
leisure to become polite and agreeable; and foreign princes were 
glad (as they have sometimes been since) to come to England on 
visits to the English court.

When Athelstan died, at forty-seven years old, his brother EDMUND, 
who was only eighteen, became king.  He was the first of six boy-
kings, as you will presently know.

They called him the Magnificent, because he showed a taste for 
improvement and refinement.  But he was beset by the Danes, and had 
a short and troubled reign, which came to a troubled end.  One 
night, when he was feasting in his hall, and had eaten much and 
drunk deep, he saw, among the company, a noted robber named LEOF, 
who had been banished from England.  Made very angry by the 
boldness of this man, the King turned to his cup-bearer, and said, 
'There is a robber sitting at the table yonder, who, for his 
crimes, is an outlaw in the land - a hunted wolf, whose life any 
man may take, at any time.  Command that robber to depart!'  'I 
will not depart!' said Leof.  'No?' cried the King.  'No, by the 
Lord!' said Leof.  Upon that the King rose from his seat, and, 
making passionately at the robber, and seizing him by his long 
hair, tried to throw him down.  But the robber had a dagger 
underneath his cloak, and, in the scuffle, stabbed the King to 
death.  That done, he set his back against the wall, and fought so 
desperately, that although he was soon cut to pieces by the King's 
armed men, and the wall and pavement were splashed with his blood, 
yet it was not before he had killed and wounded many of them.  You 
may imagine what rough lives the kings of those times led, when one 
of them could struggle, half drunk, with a public robber in his own 
dining-hall, and be stabbed in presence of the company who ate and 
drank with him.

Then succeeded the boy-king EDRED, who was weak and sickly in body, 
but of a strong mind.  And his armies fought the Northmen, the 
Danes, and Norwegians, or the Sea-Kings, as they were called, and 
beat them for the time.  And, in nine years, Edred died, and passed 
away.

Then came the boy-king EDWY, fifteen years of age; but the real 
king, who had the real power, was a monk named DUNSTAN - a clever 
priest, a little mad, and not a little proud and cruel.

Dunstan was then Abbot of Glastonbury Abbey, whither the body of 
King Edmund the Magnificent was carried, to be buried.  While yet a 
boy, he had got out of his bed one night (being then in a fever), 
and walked about Glastonbury Church when it was under repair; and, 
because he did not tumble off some scaffolds that were there, and 
break his neck, it was reported that he had been shown over the 
building by an angel.  He had also made a harp that was said to 
play of itself - which it very likely did, as AEolian Harps, which 
are played by the wind, and are understood now, always do.  For 
these wonders he had been once denounced by his enemies, who were 
jealous of his favour with the late King Athelstan, as a magician; 
and he had been waylaid, bound hand and foot, and thrown into a 
marsh.  But he got out again, somehow, to cause a great deal of 
trouble yet.

The priests of those days were, generally, the only scholars.  They 
were learned in many things.  Having to make their own convents and 
monasteries on uncultivated grounds that were granted to them by 
the Crown, it was necessary that they should be good farmers and 
good gardeners, or their lands would have been too poor to support 
them.  For the decoration of the chapels where they prayed, and for 
the comfort of the refectories where they ate and drank, it was 
necessary that there should be good carpenters, good smiths, good 
painters, among them.  For their greater safety in sickness and 
accident, living alone by themselves in solitary places, it was 
necessary that they should study the virtues of plants and herbs, 
and should know how to dress cuts, burns, scalds, and bruises, and 
how to set broken limbs.  Accordingly, they taught themselves, and 
one another, a great variety of useful arts; and became skilful in 
agriculture, medicine, surgery, and handicraft.  And when they 
wanted the aid of any little piece of machinery, which would be 
simple enough now, but was marvellous then, to impose a trick upon 
the poor peasants, they knew very well how to make it; and DID make 
it many a time and often, I have no doubt.

Dunstan, Abbot of Glastonbury Abbey, was one of the most sagacious 
of these monks.  He was an ingenious smith, and worked at a forge 
in a little cell.  This cell was made too short to admit of his 
lying at full length when he went to sleep - as if THAT did any 
good to anybody! - and he used to tell the most extraordinary lies 
about demons and spirits, who, he said, came there to persecute 
him.  For instance, he related that one day when he was at work, 
the devil looked in at the little window, and tried to tempt him to 
lead a life of idle pleasure; whereupon, having his pincers in the 
fire, red hot, he seized the devil by the nose, and put him to such 
pain, that his bellowings were heard for miles and miles.  Some 
people are inclined to think this nonsense a part of Dunstan's 
madness (for his head never quite recovered the fever), but I think 
not.  I observe that it induced the ignorant people to consider him 
a holy man, and that it made him very powerful.  Which was exactly 
what he always wanted.

On the day of the coronation of the handsome boy-king Edwy, it was 
remarked by ODO, Archbishop of Canterbury (who was a Dane by 
birth), that the King quietly left the coronation feast, while all 
the company were there.  Odo, much displeased, sent his friend 
Dunstan to seek him.  Dunstan finding him in the company of his 
beautiful young wife ELGIVA, and her mother ETHELGIVA, a good and 
virtuous lady, not only grossly abused them, but dragged the young 
King back into the feasting-hall by force.  Some, again, think 
Dunstan did this because the young King's fair wife was his own 
cousin, and the monks objected to people marrying their own 
cousins; but I believe he did it, because he was an imperious, 
audacious, ill-conditioned priest, who, having loved a young lady 
himself before he became a sour monk, hated all love now, and 
everything belonging to it.

The young King was quite old enough to feel this insult.  Dunstan 
had been Treasurer in the last reign, and he soon charged Dunstan 
with having taken some of the last king's money.  The Glastonbury 
Abbot fled to Belgium (very narrowly escaping some pursuers who 
were sent to put out his eyes, as you will wish they had, when you 
read what follows), and his abbey was given to priests who were 
married; whom he always, both before and afterwards, opposed.  But 
he quickly conspired with his friend, Odo the Dane, to set up the 
King's young brother, EDGAR, as his rival for the throne; and, not 
content with this revenge, he caused the beautiful queen Elgiva, 
though a lovely girl of only seventeen or eighteen, to be stolen 
from one of the Royal Palaces, branded in the cheek with a red-hot 
iron, and sold into slavery in Ireland.  But the Irish people 
pitied and befriended her; and they said, 'Let us restore the girl-
queen to the boy-king, and make the young lovers happy!' and they 
cured her of her cruel wound, and sent her home as beautiful as 
before.  But the villain Dunstan, and that other villain, Odo, 
caused her to be waylaid at Gloucester as she was joyfully hurrying 
to join her husband, and to be hacked and hewn with swords, and to 
be barbarously maimed and lamed, and left to die.  When Edwy the 
Fair (his people called him so, because he was so young and 
handsome) heard of her dreadful fate, he died of a broken heart; 
and so the pitiful story of the poor young wife and husband ends!  
Ah!  Better to be two cottagers in these better times, than king 
and queen of England in those bad days, though never so fair!

Then came the boy-king, EDGAR, called the Peaceful, fifteen years 
old.  Dunstan, being still the real king, drove all married priests 
out of the monasteries and abbeys, and replaced them by solitary 
monks like himself, of the rigid order called the Benedictines.  He 
made himself Archbishop of Canterbury, for his greater glory; and 
exercised such power over the neighbouring British princes, and so 
collected them about the King, that once, when the King held his 
court at Chester, and went on the river Dee to visit the monastery 
of St. John, the eight oars of his boat were pulled (as the people 
used to delight in relating in stories and songs) by eight crowned 
kings, and steered by the King of England.  As Edgar was very 
obedient to Dunstan and the monks, they took great pains to 
represent him as the best of kings.  But he was really profligate, 
debauched, and vicious.  He once forcibly carried off a young lady 
from the convent at Wilton; and Dunstan, pretending to be very much 
shocked, condemned him not to wear his crown upon his head for 
seven years - no great punishment, I dare say, as it can hardly 
have been a more comfortable ornament to wear, than a stewpan 
without a handle.  His marriage with his second wife, ELFRIDA, is 
one of the worst events of his reign.  Hearing of the beauty of 
this lady, he despatched his favourite courtier, ATHELWOLD, to her 
father's castle in Devonshire, to see if she were really as 
charming as fame reported.  Now, she was so exceedingly beautiful 
that Athelwold fell in love with her himself, and married her; but 
he told the King that she was only rich - not handsome.  The King, 
suspecting the truth when they came home, resolved to pay the 
newly-married couple a visit; and, suddenly, told Athelwold to 
prepare for his immediate coming.  Athelwold, terrified, confessed 
to his young wife what he had said and done, and implored her to 
disguise her beauty by some ugly dress or silly manner, that he 
might be safe from the King's anger.  She promised that she would; 
but she was a proud woman, who would far rather have been a queen 
than the wife of a courtier.  She dressed herself in her best 
dress, and adorned herself with her richest jewels; and when the 
King came, presently, he discovered the cheat.  So, he caused his 
false friend, Athelwold, to be murdered in a wood, and married his 
widow, this bad Elfrida.  Six or seven years afterwards, he died; 
and was buried, as if he had been all that the monks said he was, 
in the abbey of Glastonbury, which he - or Dunstan for him - had 
much enriched.

England, in one part of this reign, was so troubled by wolves, 
which, driven out of the open country, hid themselves in the 
mountains of Wales when they were not attacking travellers and 
animals, that the tribute payable by the Welsh people was forgiven 
them, on condition of their producing, every year, three hundred 
wolves' heads.  And the Welshmen were so sharp upon the wolves, to 
save their money, that in four years there was not a wolf left.

Then came the boy-king, EDWARD, called the Martyr, from the manner 
of his death.  Elfrida had a son, named ETHELRED, for whom she 
claimed the throne; but Dunstan did not choose to favour him, and 
he made Edward king.  The boy was hunting, one day, down in 
Dorsetshire, when he rode near to Corfe Castle, where Elfrida and 
Ethelred lived.  Wishing to see them kindly, he rode away from his 
attendants and galloped to the castle gate, where he arrived at 
twilight, and blew his hunting-horn.  'You are welcome, dear King,' 
said Elfrida, coming out, with her brightest smiles.  'Pray you 
dismount and enter.'  'Not so, dear madam,' said the King.  'My 
company will miss me, and fear that I have met with some harm.  
Please you to give me a cup of wine, that I may drink here, in the 
saddle, to you and to my little brother, and so ride away with the 
good speed I have made in riding here.'  Elfrida, going in to bring 
the wine, whispered an armed servant, one of her attendants, who 
stole out of the darkening gateway, and crept round behind the 
King's horse.  As the King raised the cup to his lips, saying, 
'Health!' to the wicked woman who was smiling on him, and to his 
innocent brother whose hand she held in hers, and who was only ten 
years old, this armed man made a spring and stabbed him in the 
back.  He dropped the cup and spurred his horse away; but, soon 
fainting with loss of blood, dropped from the saddle, and, in his 
fall, entangled one of his feet in the stirrup.  The frightened 
horse dashed on; trailing his rider's curls upon the ground; 
dragging his smooth young face through ruts, and stones, and 
briers, and fallen leaves, and mud; until the hunters, tracking the 
animal's course by the King's blood, caught his bridle, and 
released the disfigured body.

Then came the sixth and last of the boy-kings, ETHELRED, whom 
Elfrida, when he cried out at the sight of his murdered brother 
riding away from the castle gate, unmercifully beat with a torch 
which she snatched from one of the attendants.  The people so 
disliked this boy, on account of his cruel mother and the murder 
she had done to promote him, that Dunstan would not have had him 
for king, but would have made EDGITHA, the daughter of the dead 
King Edgar, and of the lady whom he stole out of the convent at 
Wilton, Queen of England, if she would have consented.  But she 
knew the stories of the youthful kings too well, and would not be 
persuaded from the convent where she lived in peace; so, Dunstan 
put Ethelred on the throne, having no one else to put there, and 
gave him the nickname of THE UNREADY - knowing that he wanted 
resolution and firmness.

At first, Elfrida possessed great influence over the young King, 
but, as he grew older and came of age, her influence declined.  The 
infamous woman, not having it in her power to do any more evil, 
then retired from court, and, according, to the fashion of the 
time, built churches and monasteries, to expiate her guilt.  As if 
a church, with a steeple reaching to the very stars, would have 
been any sign of true repentance for the blood of the poor boy, 
whose murdered form was trailed at his horse's heels!  As if she 
could have buried her wickedness beneath the senseless stones of 
the whole world, piled up one upon another, for the monks to live 
in!

About the ninth or tenth year of this reign, Dunstan died.  He was 
growing old then, but was as stern and artful as ever.  Two 
circumstances that happened in connexion with him, in this reign of 
Ethelred, made a great noise.  Once, he was present at a meeting of 
the Church, when the question was discussed whether priests should 
have permission to marry; and, as he sat with his head hung down, 
apparently thinking about it, a voice seemed to come out of a 
crucifix in the room, and warn the meeting to be of his opinion.  
This was some juggling of Dunstan's, and was probably his own voice 
disguised.  But he played off a worse juggle than that, soon 
afterwards; for, another meeting being held on the same subject, 
and he and his supporters being seated on one side of a great room, 
and their opponents on the other, he rose and said, 'To Christ 
himself, as judge, do I commit this cause!'  Immediately on these 
words being spoken, the floor where the opposite party sat gave 
way, and some were killed and many wounded.  You may be pretty sure 
that it had been weakened under Dunstan's direction, and that it 
fell at Dunstan's signal.  HIS part of the floor did not go down.  
No, no.  He was too good a workman for that.

When he died, the monks settled that he was a Saint, and called him 
Saint Dunstan ever afterwards.  They might just as well have 
settled that he was a coach-horse, and could just as easily have 
called him one.

Ethelred the Unready was glad enough, I dare say, to be rid of this 
holy saint; but, left to himself, he was a poor weak king, and his 
reign was a reign of defeat and shame.  The restless Danes, led by 
SWEYN, a son of the King of Denmark who had quarrelled with his 
father and had been banished from home, again came into England, 
and, year after year, attacked and despoiled large towns.  To coax 
these sea-kings away, the weak Ethelred paid them money; but, the 
more money he paid, the more money the Danes wanted.  At first, he 
gave them ten thousand pounds; on their next invasion, sixteen 
thousand pounds; on their next invasion, four and twenty thousand 
pounds:  to pay which large sums, the unfortunate English people 
were heavily taxed.  But, as the Danes still came back and wanted 
more, he thought it would be a good plan to marry into some 
powerful foreign family that would help him with soldiers.  So, in 
the year one thousand and two, he courted and married Emma, the 
sister of Richard Duke of Normandy; a lady who was called the 
Flower of Normandy.

And now, a terrible deed was done in England, the like of which was 
never done on English ground before or since.  On the thirteenth of 
November, in pursuance of secret instructions sent by the King over 
the whole country, the inhabitants of every town and city armed, 
and murdered all the Danes who were their neighbours.

Young and old, babies and soldiers, men and women, every Dane was 
killed.  No doubt there were among them many ferocious men who had 
done the English great wrong, and whose pride and insolence, in 
swaggering in the houses of the English and insulting their wives 
and daughters, had become unbearable; but no doubt there were also 
among them many peaceful Christian Danes who had married English 
women and become like English men.  They were all slain, even to 
GUNHILDA, the sister of the King of Denmark, married to an English 
lord; who was first obliged to see the murder of her husband and 
her child, and then was killed herself.

When the King of the sea-kings heard of this deed of blood, he 
swore that he would have a great revenge.  He raised an army, and a 
mightier fleet of ships than ever yet had sailed to England; and in 
all his army there was not a slave or an old man, but every soldier 
was a free man, and the son of a free man, and in the prime of 
life, and sworn to be revenged upon the English nation, for the 
massacre of that dread thirteenth of November, when his countrymen 
and countrywomen, and the little children whom they loved, were 
killed with fire and sword.  And so, the sea-kings came to England 
in many great ships, each bearing the flag of its own commander.  
Golden eagles, ravens, dragons, dolphins, beasts of prey, 
threatened England from the prows of those ships, as they came 
onward through the water; and were reflected in the shining shields 
that hung upon their sides.  The ship that bore the standard of the 
King of the sea-kings was carved and painted like a mighty serpent; 
and the King in his anger prayed that the Gods in whom he trusted 
might all desert him, if his serpent did not strike its fangs into 
England's heart.

And indeed it did.  For, the great army landing from the great 
fleet, near Exeter, went forward, laying England waste, and 
striking their lances in the earth as they advanced, or throwing 
them into rivers, in token of their making all the island theirs.  
In remembrance of the black November night when the Danes were 
murdered, wheresoever the invaders came, they made the Saxons 
prepare and spread for them great feasts; and when they had eaten 
those feasts, and had drunk a curse to England with wild 
rejoicings, they drew their swords, and killed their Saxon 
entertainers, and marched on.  For six long years they carried on 
this war:  burning the crops, farmhouses, barns, mills, granaries; 
killing the labourers in the fields; preventing the seed from being 
sown in the ground; causing famine and starvation; leaving only 
heaps of ruin and smoking ashes, where they had found rich towns.  
To crown this misery, English officers and men deserted, and even 
the favourites of Ethelred the Unready, becoming traitors, seized 
many of the English ships, turned pirates against their own 
country, and aided by a storm occasioned the loss of nearly the 
whole English navy.

There was but one man of note, at this miserable pass, who was true 
to his country and the feeble King.  He was a priest, and a brave 
one.  For twenty days, the Archbishop of Canterbury defended that 
city against its Danish besiegers; and when a traitor in the town 
threw the gates open and admitted them, he said, in chains, 'I will 
not buy my life with money that must be extorted from the suffering 
people.  Do with me what you please!'  Again and again, he steadily 
refused to purchase his release with gold wrung from the poor.

At last, the Danes being tired of this, and being assembled at a 
drunken merry-making, had him brought into the feasting-hall.

'Now, bishop,' they said, 'we want gold!'

He looked round on the crowd of angry faces; from the shaggy beards 
close to him, to the shaggy beards against the walls, where men 
were mounted on tables and forms to see him over the heads of 
others:  and he knew that his time was come.

'I have no gold,' he said.

'Get it, bishop!' they all thundered.

'That, I have often told you I will not,' said he.

They gathered closer round him, threatening, but he stood unmoved.  
Then, one man struck him; then, another; then a cursing soldier 
picked up from a heap in a corner of the hall, where fragments had 
been rudely thrown at dinner, a great ox-bone, and cast it at his 
face, from which the blood came spurting forth; then, others ran to 
the same heap, and knocked him down with other bones, and bruised 
and battered him; until one soldier whom he had baptised (willing, 
as I hope for the sake of that soldier's soul, to shorten the 
sufferings of the good man) struck him dead with his battle-axe.

If Ethelred had had the heart to emulate the courage of this noble 
archbishop, he might have done something yet.  But he paid the 
Danes forty-eight thousand pounds, instead, and gained so little by 
the cowardly act, that Sweyn soon afterwards came over to subdue 
all England.  So broken was the attachment of the English people, 
by this time, to their incapable King and their forlorn country 
which could not protect them, that they welcomed Sweyn on all 
sides, as a deliverer.  London faithfully stood out, as long as the 
King was within its walls; but, when he sneaked away, it also 
welcomed the Dane.  Then, all was over; and the King took refuge 
abroad with the Duke of Normandy, who had already given shelter to 
the King's wife, once the Flower of that country, and to her 
children.

Still, the English people, in spite of their sad sufferings, could 
not quite forget the great King Alfred and the Saxon race.  When 
Sweyn died suddenly, in little more than a month after he had been 
proclaimed King of England, they generously sent to Ethelred, to 
say that they would have him for their King again, 'if he would 
only govern them better than he had governed them before.'  The 
Unready, instead of coming himself, sent Edward, one of his sons, 
to make promises for him.  At last, he followed, and the English 
declared him King.  The Danes declared CANUTE, the son of Sweyn, 
King.  Thus, direful war began again, and lasted for three years, 
when the Unready died.  And I know of nothing better that he did, 
in all his reign of eight and thirty years.

Was Canute to be King now?  Not over the Saxons, they said; they 
must have EDMUND, one of the sons of the Unready, who was surnamed 
IRONSIDE, because of his strength and stature.  Edmund and Canute 
thereupon fell to, and fought five battles - O unhappy England, 
what a fighting-ground it was! - and then Ironside, who was a big 
man, proposed to Canute, who was a little man, that they two should 
fight it out in single combat.  If Canute had been the big man, he 
would probably have said yes, but, being the little man, he 
decidedly said no.  However, he declared that he was willing to 
divide the kingdom - to take all that lay north of Watling Street, 
as the old Roman military road from Dover to Chester was called, 
and to give Ironside all that lay south of it.  Most men being 
weary of so much bloodshed, this was done.  But Canute soon became 
sole King of England; for Ironside died suddenly within two months.  
Some think that he was killed, and killed by Canute's orders.  No 
one knows.



CHAPTER V - ENGLAND UNDER CANUTE THE DANE



CANUTE reigned eighteen years.  He was a merciless King at first.  
After he had clasped the hands of the Saxon chiefs, in token of the 
sincerity with which he swore to be just and good to them in return 
for their acknowledging him, he denounced and slew many of them, as 
well as many relations of the late King.  'He who brings me the 
head of one of my enemies,' he used to say, 'shall be dearer to me 
than a brother.'  And he was so severe in hunting down his enemies, 
that he must have got together a pretty large family of these dear 
brothers.  He was strongly inclined to kill EDMUND and EDWARD, two 
children, sons of poor Ironside; but, being afraid to do so in 
England, he sent them over to the King of Sweden, with a request 
that the King would be so good as 'dispose of them.'  If the King 
of Sweden had been like many, many other men of that day, he would 
have had their innocent throats cut; but he was a kind man, and 
brought them up tenderly.

Normandy ran much in Canute's mind.  In Normandy were the two 
children of the late king - EDWARD and ALFRED by name; and their 
uncle the Duke might one day claim the crown for them.  But the 
Duke showed so little inclination to do so now, that he proposed to 
Canute to marry his sister, the widow of The Unready; who, being 
but a showy flower, and caring for nothing so much as becoming a 
queen again, left her children and was wedded to him.

Successful and triumphant, assisted by the valour of the English in 
his foreign wars, and with little strife to trouble him at home, 
Canute had a prosperous reign, and made many improvements.  He was 
a poet and a musician.  He grew sorry, as he grew older, for the 
blood he had shed at first; and went to Rome in a Pilgrim's dress, 
by way of washing it out.  He gave a great deal of money to 
foreigners on his journey; but he took it from the English before 
he started.  On the whole, however, he certainly became a far 
better man when he had no opposition to contend with, and was as 
great a King as England had known for some time.

The old writers of history relate how that Canute was one day 
disgusted with his courtiers for their flattery, and how he caused 
his chair to be set on the sea-shore, and feigned to command the 
tide as it came up not to wet the edge of his robe, for the land 
was his; how the tide came up, of course, without regarding him; 
and how he then turned to his flatterers, and rebuked them, saying, 
what was the might of any earthly king, to the might of the 
Creator, who could say unto the sea, 'Thus far shalt thou go, and 
no farther!'  We may learn from this, I think, that a little sense 
will go a long way in a king; and that courtiers are not easily 
cured of flattery, nor kings of a liking for it.  If the courtiers 
of Canute had not known, long before, that the King was fond of 
flattery, they would have known better than to offer it in such 
large doses.  And if they had not known that he was vain of this 
speech (anything but a wonderful speech it seems to me, if a good 
child had made it), they would not have been at such great pains to 
repeat it.  I fancy I see them all on the sea-shore together; the 
King's chair sinking in the sand; the King in a mighty good humour 
with his own wisdom; and the courtiers pretending to be quite 
stunned by it!

It is not the sea alone that is bidden to go 'thus far, and no 
farther.'  The great command goes forth to all the kings upon the 
earth, and went to Canute in the year one thousand and thirty-five, 
and stretched him dead upon his bed.  Beside it, stood his Norman 
wife.  Perhaps, as the King looked his last upon her, he, who had 
so often thought distrustfully of Normandy, long ago, thought once 
more of the two exiled Princes in their uncle's court, and of the 
little favour they could feel for either Danes or Saxons, and of a 
rising cloud in Normandy that slowly moved towards England.



CHAPTER VI - ENGLAND UNDER HAROLD HAREFOOT, HARDICANUTE, AND EDWARD 
THE CONFESSOR



CANUTE left three sons, by name SWEYN, HAROLD, and HARDICANUTE; but 
his Queen, Emma, once the Flower of Normandy, was the mother of 
only Hardicanute.  Canute had wished his dominions to be divided 
between the three, and had wished Harold to have England; but the 
Saxon people in the South of England, headed by a nobleman with 
great possessions, called the powerful EARL GODWIN (who is said to 
have been originally a poor cow-boy), opposed this, and desired to 
have, instead, either Hardicanute, or one of the two exiled Princes 
who were over in Normandy.  It seemed so certain that there would 
be more bloodshed to settle this dispute, that many people left 
their homes, and took refuge in the woods and swamps.  Happily, 
however, it was agreed to refer the whole question to a great 
meeting at Oxford, which decided that Harold should have all the 
country north of the Thames, with London for his capital city, and 
that Hardicanute should have all the south.  The quarrel was so 
arranged; and, as Hardicanute was in Denmark troubling himself very 
little about anything but eating and getting drunk, his mother and 
Earl Godwin governed the south for him.

They had hardly begun to do so, and the trembling people who had 
hidden themselves were scarcely at home again, when Edward, the 
elder of the two exiled Princes, came over from Normandy with a few 
followers, to claim the English Crown.  His mother Emma, however, 
who only cared for her last son Hardicanute, instead of assisting 
him, as he expected, opposed him so strongly with all her influence 
that he was very soon glad to get safely back.  His brother Alfred 
was not so fortunate.  Believing in an affectionate letter, written 
some time afterwards to him and his brother, in his mother's name 
(but whether really with or without his mother's knowledge is now 
uncertain), he allowed himself to be tempted over to England, with 
a good force of soldiers, and landing on the Kentish coast, and 
being met and welcomed by Earl Godwin, proceeded into Surrey, as 
far as the town of Guildford.  Here, he and his men halted in the 
evening to rest, having still the Earl in their company; who had 
ordered lodgings and good cheer for them.  But, in the dead of the 
night, when they were off their guard, being divided into small 
parties sleeping soundly after a long march and a plentiful supper 
in different houses, they were set upon by the King's troops, and 
taken prisoners.  Next morning they were drawn out in a line, to 
the number of six hundred men, and were barbarously tortured and 
killed; with the exception of every tenth man, who was sold into 
slavery.  As to the wretched Prince Alfred, he was stripped naked, 
tied to a horse and sent away into the Isle of Ely, where his eyes 
were torn out of his head, and where in a few days he miserably 
died.  I am not sure that the Earl had wilfully entrapped him, but 
I suspect it strongly.

Harold was now King all over England, though it is doubtful whether 
the Archbishop of Canterbury (the greater part of the priests were 
Saxons, and not friendly to the Danes) ever consented to crown him.  
Crowned or uncrowned, with the Archbishop's leave or without it, he 
was King for four years:  after which short reign he died, and was 
buried; having never done much in life but go a hunting.  He was 
such a fast runner at this, his favourite sport, that the people 
called him Harold Harefoot.

Hardicanute was then at Bruges, in Flanders, plotting, with his 
mother (who had gone over there after the cruel murder of Prince 
Alfred), for the invasion of England.  The Danes and Saxons, 
finding themselves without a King, and dreading new disputes, made 
common cause, and joined in inviting him to occupy the Throne.  He 
consented, and soon troubled them enough; for he brought over 
numbers of Danes, and taxed the people so insupportably to enrich 
those greedy favourites that there were many insurrections, 
especially one at Worcester, where the citizens rose and killed his 
tax-collectors; in revenge for which he burned their city.  He was 
a brutal King, whose first public act was to order the dead body of 
poor Harold Harefoot to be dug up, beheaded, and thrown into the 
river.  His end was worthy of such a beginning.  He fell down 
drunk, with a goblet of wine in his hand, at a wedding-feast at 
Lambeth, given in honour of the marriage of his standard-bearer, a 
Dane named TOWED THE PROUD.  And he never spoke again.

EDWARD, afterwards called by the monks THE CONFESSOR, succeeded; 
and his first act was to oblige his mother Emma, who had favoured 
him so little, to retire into the country; where she died some ten 
years afterwards.  He was the exiled prince whose brother Alfred 
had been so foully killed.  He had been invited over from Normandy 
by Hardicanute, in the course of his short reign of two years, and 
had been handsomely treated at court.  His cause was now favoured 
by the powerful Earl Godwin, and he was soon made King.  This Earl 
had been suspected by the people, ever since Prince Alfred's cruel 
death; he had even been tried in the last reign for the Prince's 
murder, but had been pronounced not guilty; chiefly, as it was 
supposed, because of a present he had made to the swinish King, of 
a gilded ship with a figure-head of solid gold, and a crew of 
eighty splendidly armed men.  It was his interest to help the new 
King with his power, if the new King would help him against the 
popular distrust and hatred.  So they made a bargain.  Edward the 
Confessor got the Throne.  The Earl got more power and more land, 
and his daughter Editha was made queen; for it was a part of their 
compact that the King should take her for his wife.

But, although she was a gentle lady, in all things worthy to be 
beloved - good, beautiful, sensible, and kind - the King from the 
first neglected her.  Her father and her six proud brothers, 
resenting this cold treatment, harassed the King greatly by 
exerting all their power to make him unpopular.  Having lived so 
long in Normandy, he preferred the Normans to the English.  He made 
a Norman Archbishop, and Norman Bishops; his great officers and 
favourites were all Normans; he introduced the Norman fashions and 
the Norman language; in imitation of the state custom of Normandy, 
he attached a great seal to his state documents, instead of merely 
marking them, as the Saxon Kings had done, with the sign of the 
cross - just as poor people who have never been taught to write, 
now make the same mark for their names.  All this, the powerful 
Earl Godwin and his six proud sons represented to the people as 
disfavour shown towards the English; and thus they daily increased 
their own power, and daily diminished the power of the King.

They were greatly helped by an event that occurred when he had 
reigned eight years.  Eustace, Earl of Bologne, who had married the 
King's sister, came to England on a visit.  After staying at the 
court some time, he set forth, with his numerous train of 
attendants, to return home.  They were to embark at Dover.  
Entering that peaceful town in armour, they took possession of the 
best houses, and noisily demanded to be lodged and entertained 
without payment.  One of the bold men of Dover, who would not 
endure to have these domineering strangers jingling their heavy 
swords and iron corselets up and down his house, eating his meat 
and drinking his strong liquor, stood in his doorway and refused 
admission to the first armed man who came there.  The armed man 
drew, and wounded him.  The man of Dover struck the armed man dead.  
Intelligence of what he had done, spreading through the streets to 
where the Count Eustace and his men were standing by their horses, 
bridle in hand, they passionately mounted, galloped to the house, 
surrounded it, forced their way in (the doors and windows being 
closed when they came up), and killed the man of Dover at his own 
fireside.  They then clattered through the streets, cutting down 
and riding over men, women, and children.  This did not last long, 
you may believe.  The men of Dover set upon them with great fury, 
killed nineteen of the foreigners, wounded many more, and, 
blockading the road to the port so that they should not embark, 
beat them out of the town by the way they had come.  Hereupon, 
Count Eustace rides as hard as man can ride to Gloucester, where 
Edward is, surrounded by Norman monks and Norman lords.  'Justice!' 
cries the Count, 'upon the men of Dover, who have set upon and 
slain my people!'  The King sends immediately for the powerful Earl 
Godwin, who happens to be near; reminds him that Dover is under his 
government; and orders him to repair to Dover and do military 
execution on the inhabitants.  'It does not become you,' says the 
proud Earl in reply, 'to condemn without a hearing those whom you 
have sworn to protect.  I will not do it.'

The King, therefore, summoned the Earl, on pain of banishment and 
loss of his titles and property, to appear before the court to 
answer this disobedience.  The Earl refused to appear.  He, his 
eldest son Harold, and his second son Sweyn, hastily raised as many 
fighting men as their utmost power could collect, and demanded to 
have Count Eustace and his followers surrendered to the justice of 
the country.  The King, in his turn, refused to give them up, and 
raised a strong force.  After some treaty and delay, the troops of 
the great Earl and his sons began to fall off.  The Earl, with a 
part of his family and abundance of treasure, sailed to Flanders; 
Harold escaped to Ireland; and the power of the great family was 
for that time gone in England.  But, the people did not forget 
them.

Then, Edward the Confessor, with the true meanness of a mean 
spirit, visited his dislike of the once powerful father and sons 
upon the helpless daughter and sister, his unoffending wife, whom 
all who saw her (her husband and his monks excepted) loved.  He 
seized rapaciously upon her fortune and her jewels, and allowing 
her only one attendant, confined her in a gloomy convent, of which 
a sister of his - no doubt an unpleasant lady after his own heart - 
was abbess or jailer.

Having got Earl Godwin and his six sons well out of his way, the 
King favoured the Normans more than ever.  He invited over WILLIAM, 
DUKE OF NORMANDY, the son of that Duke who had received him and his 
murdered brother long ago, and of a peasant girl, a tanner's 
daughter, with whom that Duke had fallen in love for her beauty as 
he saw her washing clothes in a brook.  William, who was a great 
warrior, with a passion for fine horses, dogs, and arms, accepted 
the invitation; and the Normans in England, finding themselves more 
numerous than ever when he arrived with his retinue, and held in 
still greater honour at court than before, became more and more 
haughty towards the people, and were more and more disliked by 
them.

The old Earl Godwin, though he was abroad, knew well how the people 
felt; for, with part of the treasure he had carried away with him, 
he kept spies and agents in his pay all over England.

Accordingly, he thought the time was come for fitting out a great 
expedition against the Norman-loving King.  With it, he sailed to 
the Isle of Wight, where he was joined by his son Harold, the most 
gallant and brave of all his family.  And so the father and son 
came sailing up the Thames to Southwark; great numbers of the 
people declaring for them, and shouting for the English Earl and 
the English Harold, against the Norman favourites!

The King was at first as blind and stubborn as kings usually have 
been whensoever they have been in the hands of monks.  But the 
people rallied so thickly round the old Earl and his son, and the 
old Earl was so steady in demanding without bloodshed the 
restoration of himself and his family to their rights, that at last 
the court took the alarm.  The Norman Archbishop of Canterbury, and 
the Norman Bishop of London, surrounded by their retainers, fought 
their way out of London, and escaped from Essex to France in a 
fishing-boat.  The other Norman favourites dispersed in all 
directions.  The old Earl and his sons (except Sweyn, who had 
committed crimes against the law) were restored to their 
possessions and dignities.  Editha, the virtuous and lovely Queen 
of the insensible King, was triumphantly released from her prison, 
the convent, and once more sat in her chair of state, arrayed in 
the jewels of which, when she had no champion to support her 
rights, her cold-blooded husband had deprived her.

The old Earl Godwin did not long enjoy his restored fortune.  He 
fell down in a fit at the King's table, and died upon the third day 
afterwards.  Harold succeeded to his power, and to a far higher 
place in the attachment of the people than his father had ever 
held.  By his valour he subdued the King's enemies in many bloody 
fights.  He was vigorous against rebels in Scotland - this was the 
time when Macbeth slew Duncan, upon which event our English 
Shakespeare, hundreds of years afterwards, wrote his great tragedy; 
and he killed the restless Welsh King GRIFFITH, and brought his 
head to England.

What Harold was doing at sea, when he was driven on the French 
coast by a tempest, is not at all certain; nor does it at all 
matter.  That his ship was forced by a storm on that shore, and 
that he was taken prisoner, there is no doubt.  In those barbarous 
days, all shipwrecked strangers were taken prisoners, and obliged 
to pay ransom.  So, a certain Count Guy, who was the Lord of 
Ponthieu where Harold's disaster happened, seized him, instead of 
relieving him like a hospitable and Christian lord as he ought to 
have done, and expected to make a very good thing of it.

But Harold sent off immediately to Duke William of Normandy, 
complaining of this treatment; and the Duke no sooner heard of it 
than he ordered Harold to be escorted to the ancient town of Rouen, 
where he then was, and where he received him as an honoured guest.  
Now, some writers tell us that Edward the Confessor, who was by 
this time old and had no children, had made a will, appointing Duke 
William of Normandy his successor, and had informed the Duke of his 
having done so.  There is no doubt that he was anxious about his 
successor; because he had even invited over, from abroad, EDWARD 
THE OUTLAW, a son of Ironside, who had come to England with his 
wife and three children, but whom the King had strangely refused to 
see when he did come, and who had died in London suddenly (princes 
were terribly liable to sudden death in those days), and had been 
buried in St. Paul's Cathedral.  The King might possibly have made 
such a will; or, having always been fond of the Normans, he might 
have encouraged Norman William to aspire to the English crown, by 
something that he said to him when he was staying at the English 
court.  But, certainly William did now aspire to it; and knowing 
that Harold would be a powerful rival, he called together a great 
assembly of his nobles, offered Harold his daughter ADELE in 
marriage, informed him that he meant on King Edward's death to 
claim the English crown as his own inheritance, and required Harold 
then and there to swear to aid him.  Harold, being in the Duke's 
power, took this oath upon the Missal, or Prayer-book.  It is a 
good example of the superstitions of the monks, that this Missal, 
instead of being placed upon a table, was placed upon a tub; which, 
when Harold had sworn, was uncovered, and shown to be full of dead 
men's bones - bones, as the monks pretended, of saints.  This was 
supposed to make Harold's oath a great deal more impressive and 
binding.  As if the great name of the Creator of Heaven and earth 
could be made more solemn by a knuckle-bone, or a double-tooth, or 
a finger-nail, of Dunstan!

Within a week or two after Harold's return to England, the dreary 
old Confessor was found to be dying.  After wandering in his mind 
like a very weak old man, he died.  As he had put himself entirely 
in the hands of the monks when he was alive, they praised him 
lustily when he was dead.  They had gone so far, already, as to 
persuade him that he could work miracles; and had brought people 
afflicted with a bad disorder of the skin, to him, to be touched 
and cured.  This was called 'touching for the King's Evil,' which 
afterwards became a royal custom.  You know, however, Who really 
touched the sick, and healed them; and you know His sacred name is 
not among the dusty line of human kings.



CHAPTER VII - ENGLAND UNDER HAROLD THE SECOND, AND CONQUERED BY THE 
NORMANS



HAROLD was crowned King of England on the very day of the maudlin 
Confessor's funeral.  He had good need to be quick about it.  When 
the news reached Norman William, hunting in his park at Rouen, he 
dropped his bow, returned to his palace, called his nobles to 
council, and presently sent ambassadors to Harold, calling on him 
to keep his oath and resign the Crown.  Harold would do no such 
thing.  The barons of France leagued together round Duke William 
for the invasion of England.  Duke William promised freely to 
distribute English wealth and English lands among them.  The Pope 
sent to Normandy a consecrated banner, and a ring containing a hair 
which he warranted to have grown on the head of Saint Peter.  He 
blessed the enterprise; and cursed Harold; and requested that the 
Normans would pay 'Peter's Pence' - or a tax to himself of a penny 
a year on every house - a little more regularly in future, if they 
could make it convenient.

King Harold had a rebel brother in Flanders, who was a vassal of 
HAROLD HARDRADA, King of Norway.  This brother, and this Norwegian 
King, joining their forces against England, with Duke William's 
help, won a fight in which the English were commanded by two 
nobles; and then besieged York.  Harold, who was waiting for the 
Normans on the coast at Hastings, with his army, marched to 
Stamford Bridge upon the river Derwent to give them instant battle.

He found them drawn up in a hollow circle, marked out by their 
shining spears.  Riding round this circle at a distance, to survey 
it, he saw a brave figure on horseback, in a blue mantle and a 
bright helmet, whose horse suddenly stumbled and threw him.

'Who is that man who has fallen?' Harold asked of one of his 
captains.

'The King of Norway,' he replied.

'He is a tall and stately king,' said Harold, 'but his end is 
near.'

He added, in a little while, 'Go yonder to my brother, and tell 
him, if he withdraw his troops, he shall be Earl of Northumberland, 
and rich and powerful in England.'

The captain rode away and gave the message.

'What will he give to my friend the King of Norway?' asked the 
brother.

'Seven feet of earth for a grave,' replied the captain.

'No more?' returned the brother, with a smile.

'The King of Norway being a tall man, perhaps a little more,' 
replied the captain.

'Ride back!' said the brother, 'and tell King Harold to make ready 
for the fight!'

He did so, very soon.  And such a fight King Harold led against 
that force, that his brother, and the Norwegian King, and every 
chief of note in all their host, except the Norwegian King's son, 
Olave, to whom he gave honourable dismissal, were left dead upon 
the field.  The victorious army marched to York.  As King Harold 
sat there at the feast, in the midst of all his company, a stir was 
heard at the doors; and messengers all covered with mire from 
riding far and fast through broken ground came hurrying in, to 
report that the Normans had landed in England.

The intelligence was true.  They had been tossed about by contrary 
winds, and some of their ships had been wrecked.  A part of their 
own shore, to which they had been driven back, was strewn with 
Norman bodies.  But they had once more made sail, led by the Duke's 
own galley, a present from his wife, upon the prow whereof the 
figure of a golden boy stood pointing towards England.  By day, the 
banner of the three Lions of Normandy, the diverse coloured sails, 
the gilded vans, the many decorations of this gorgeous ship, had 
glittered in the sun and sunny water; by night, a light had 
sparkled like a star at her mast-head.  And now, encamped near 
Hastings, with their leader lying in the old Roman castle of 
Pevensey, the English retiring in all directions, the land for 
miles around scorched and smoking, fired and pillaged, was the 
whole Norman power, hopeful and strong on English ground.

Harold broke up the feast and hurried to London.  Within a week, 
his army was ready.  He sent out spies to ascertain the Norman 
strength.  William took them, caused them to be led through his 
whole camp, and then dismissed.  'The Normans,' said these spies to 
Harold, 'are not bearded on the upper lip as we English are, but 
are shorn.  They are priests.'  'My men,' replied Harold, with a 
laugh, 'will find those priests good soldiers!'

'The Saxons,' reported Duke William's outposts of Norman soldiers, 
who were instructed to retire as King Harold's army advanced, 'rush 
on us through their pillaged country with the fury of madmen.'

'Let them come, and come soon!' said Duke William.

Some proposals for a reconciliation were made, but were soon 
abandoned.  In the middle of the month of October, in the year one 
thousand and sixty-six, the Normans and the English came front to 
front.  All night the armies lay encamped before each other, in a 
part of the country then called Senlac, now called (in remembrance 
of them) Battle.  With the first dawn of day, they arose.  There, 
in the faint light, were the English on a hill; a wood behind them; 
in their midst, the Royal banner, representing a fighting warrior, 
woven in gold thread, adorned with precious stones; beneath the 
banner, as it rustled in the wind, stood King Harold on foot, with 
two of his remaining brothers by his side; around them, still and 
silent as the dead, clustered the whole English army - every 
soldier covered by his shield, and bearing in his hand his dreaded 
English battle-axe.

On an opposite hill, in three lines, archers, foot-soldiers, 
horsemen, was the Norman force.  Of a sudden, a great battle-cry, 
'God help us!' burst from the Norman lines.  The English answered 
with their own battle-cry, 'God's Rood!  Holy Rood!'  The Normans 
then came sweeping down the hill to attack the English.

There was one tall Norman Knight who rode before the Norman army on 
a prancing horse, throwing up his heavy sword and catching it, and 
singing of the bravery of his countrymen.  An English Knight, who 
rode out from the English force to meet him, fell by this Knight's 
hand.  Another English Knight rode out, and he fell too.  But then 
a third rode out, and killed the Norman.  This was in the first 
beginning of the fight.  It soon raged everywhere.

The English, keeping side by side in a great mass, cared no more 
for the showers of Norman arrows than if they had been showers of 
Norman rain.  When the Norman horsemen rode against them, with 
their battle-axes they cut men and horses down.  The Normans gave 
way.  The English pressed forward.  A cry went forth among the 
Norman troops that Duke William was killed.  Duke William took off 
his helmet, in order that his face might be distinctly seen, and 
rode along the line before his men.  This gave them courage.  As 
they turned again to face the English, some of their Norman horse 
divided the pursuing body of the English from the rest, and thus 
all that foremost portion of the English army fell, fighting 
bravely.  The main body still remaining firm, heedless of the 
Norman arrows, and with their battle-axes cutting down the crowds 
of horsemen when they rode up, like forests of young trees, Duke 
William pretended to retreat.  The eager English followed.  The 
Norman army closed again, and fell upon them with great slaughter.

'Still,' said Duke William, 'there are thousands of the English, 
firms as rocks around their King.  Shoot upward, Norman archers, 
that your arrows may fall down upon their faces!'

The sun rose high, and sank, and the battle still raged.  Through 
all the wild October day, the clash and din resounded in the air.  
In the red sunset, and in the white moonlight, heaps upon heaps of 
dead men lay strewn, a dreadful spectacle, all over the ground.

King Harold, wounded with an arrow in the eye, was nearly blind.  
His brothers were already killed.  Twenty Norman Knights, whose 
battered armour had flashed fiery and golden in the sunshine all 
day long, and now looked silvery in the moonlight, dashed forward 
to seize the Royal banner from the English Knights and soldiers, 
still faithfully collected round their blinded King.  The King 
received a mortal wound, and dropped.  The English broke and fled.  
The Normans rallied, and the day was lost.

O what a sight beneath the moon and stars, when lights were shining 
in the tent of the victorious Duke William, which was pitched near 
the spot where Harold fell - and he and his knights were carousing, 
within - and soldiers with torches, going slowly to and fro, 
without, sought for the corpse of Harold among piles of dead - and 
the Warrior, worked in golden thread and precious stones, lay low, 
all torn and soiled with blood - and the three Norman Lions kept 
watch over the field!



CHAPTER VIII - ENGLAND UNDER WILLIAM THE FIRST, THE NORMAN 
CONQUEROR



UPON the ground where the brave Harold fell, William the Norman 
afterwards founded an abbey, which, under the name of Battle Abbey, 
was a rich and splendid place through many a troubled year, though 
now it is a grey ruin overgrown with ivy.  But the first work he 
had to do, was to conquer the English thoroughly; and that, as you 
know by this time, was hard work for any man.

He ravaged several counties; he burned and plundered many towns; he 
laid waste scores upon scores of miles of pleasant country; he 
destroyed innumerable lives.  At length STIGAND, Archbishop of 
Canterbury, with other representatives of the clergy and the 
people, went to his camp, and submitted to him.  EDGAR, the 
insignificant son of Edmund Ironside, was proclaimed King by 
others, but nothing came of it.  He fled to Scotland afterwards, 
where his sister, who was young and beautiful, married the Scottish 
King.  Edgar himself was not important enough for anybody to care 
much about him.

On Christmas Day, William was crowned in Westminster Abbey, under 
the title of WILLIAM THE FIRST; but he is best known as WILLIAM THE 
CONQUEROR.  It was a strange coronation.  One of the bishops who 
performed the ceremony asked the Normans, in French, if they would 
have Duke William for their king?  They answered Yes.  Another of 
the bishops put the same question to the Saxons, in English.  They 
too answered Yes, with a loud shout.  The noise being heard by a 
guard of Norman horse-soldiers outside, was mistaken for resistance 
on the part of the English.  The guard instantly set fire to the 
neighbouring houses, and a tumult ensued; in the midst of which the 
King, being left alone in the Abbey, with a few priests (and they 
all being in a terrible fright together), was hurriedly crowned.  
When the crown was placed upon his head, he swore to govern the 
English as well as the best of their own monarchs.  I dare say you 
think, as I do, that if we except the Great Alfred, he might pretty 
easily have done that.

Numbers of the English nobles had been killed in the last 
disastrous battle.  Their estates, and the estates of all the 
nobles who had fought against him there, King William seized upon, 
and gave to his own Norman knights and nobles.  Many great English 
families of the present time acquired their English lands in this 
way, and are very proud of it.

But what is got by force must be maintained by force.  These nobles 
were obliged to build castles all over England, to defend their new 
property; and, do what he would, the King could neither soothe nor 
quell the nation as he wished.  He gradually introduced the Norman 
language and the Norman customs; yet, for a long time the great 
body of the English remained sullen and revengeful.  On his going 
over to Normandy, to visit his subjects there, the oppressions of 
his half-brother ODO, whom he left in charge of his English 
kingdom, drove the people mad.  The men of Kent even invited over, 
to take possession of Dover, their old enemy Count Eustace of 
Boulogne, who had led the fray when the Dover man was slain at his 
own fireside.  The men of Hereford, aided by the Welsh, and 
commanded by a chief named EDRIC THE WILD, drove the Normans out of 
their country.  Some of those who had been dispossessed of their 
lands, banded together in the North of England; some, in Scotland; 
some, in the thick woods and marshes; and whensoever they could 
fall upon the Normans, or upon the English who had submitted to the 
Normans, they fought, despoiled, and murdered, like the desperate 
outlaws that they were.  Conspiracies were set on foot for a 
general massacre of the Normans, like the old massacre of the 
Danes.  In short, the English were in a murderous mood all through 
the kingdom.

King William, fearing he might lose his conquest, came back, and 
tried to pacify the London people by soft words.  He then set forth 
to repress the country people by stern deeds.  Among the towns 
which he besieged, and where he killed and maimed the inhabitants 
without any distinction, sparing none, young or old, armed or 
unarmed, were Oxford, Warwick, Leicester, Nottingham, Derby, 
Lincoln, York.  In all these places, and in many others, fire and 
sword worked their utmost horrors, and made the land dreadful to 
behold.  The streams and rivers were discoloured with blood; the 
sky was blackened with smoke; the fields were wastes of ashes; the 
waysides were heaped up with dead.  Such are the fatal results of 
conquest and ambition!  Although William was a harsh and angry man, 
I do not suppose that he deliberately meant to work this shocking 
ruin, when he invaded England.  But what he had got by the strong 
hand, he could only keep by the strong hand, and in so doing he 
made England a great grave.

Two sons of Harold, by name EDMUND and GODWIN, came over from 
Ireland, with some ships, against the Normans, but were defeated.  
This was scarcely done, when the outlaws in the woods so harassed 
York, that the Governor sent to the King for help.  The King 
despatched a general and a large force to occupy the town of 
Durham.  The Bishop of that place met the general outside the town, 
and warned him not to enter, as he would be in danger there.  The 
general cared nothing for the warning, and went in with all his 
men.  That night, on every hill within sight of Durham, signal 
fires were seen to blaze.  When the morning dawned, the English, 
who had assembled in great strength, forced the gates, rushed into 
the town, and slew the Normans every one.  The English afterwards 
besought the Danes to come and help them.  The Danes came, with two 
hundred and forty ships.  The outlawed nobles joined them; they 
captured York, and drove the Normans out of that city.  Then, 
William bribed the Danes to go away; and took such vengeance on the 
English, that all the former fire and sword, smoke and ashes, death 
and ruin, were nothing compared with it.  In melancholy songs, and 
doleful stories, it was still sung and told by cottage fires on 
winter evenings, a hundred years afterwards, how, in those dreadful 
days of the Normans, there was not, from the River Humber to the 
River Tyne, one inhabited village left, nor one cultivated field - 
how there was nothing but a dismal ruin, where the human creatures 
and the beasts lay dead together.

The outlaws had, at this time, what they called a Camp of Refuge, 
in the midst of the fens of Cambridgeshire.  Protected by those 
marshy grounds which were difficult of approach, they lay among the 
reeds and rushes, and were hidden by the mists that rose up from 
the watery earth.  Now, there also was, at that time, over the sea 
in Flanders, an Englishman named HEREWARD, whose father had died in 
his absence, and whose property had been given to a Norman.  When 
he heard of this wrong that had been done him (from such of the 
exiled English as chanced to wander into that country), he longed 
for revenge; and joining the outlaws in their camp of refuge, 
became their commander.  He was so good a soldier, that the Normans 
supposed him to be aided by enchantment.  William, even after he 
had made a road three miles in length across the Cambridgeshire 
marshes, on purpose to attack this supposed enchanter, thought it 
necessary to engage an old lady, who pretended to be a sorceress, 
to come and do a little enchantment in the royal cause.  For this 
purpose she was pushed on before the troops in a wooden tower; but 
Hereward very soon disposed of this unfortunate sorceress, by 
burning her, tower and all.  The monks of the convent of Ely near 
at hand, however, who were fond of good living, and who found it 
very uncomfortable to have the country blockaded and their supplies 
of meat and drink cut off, showed the King a secret way of 
surprising the camp.  So Hereward was soon defeated.  Whether he 
afterwards died quietly, or whether he was killed after killing 
sixteen of the men who attacked him (as some old rhymes relate that 
he did), I cannot say.  His defeat put an end to the Camp of 
Refuge; and, very soon afterwards, the King, victorious both in 
Scotland and in England, quelled the last rebellious English noble.  
He then surrounded himself with Norman lords, enriched by the 
property of English nobles; had a great survey made of all the land 
in England, which was entered as the property of its new owners, on 
a roll called Doomsday Book; obliged the people to put out their 
fires and candles at a certain hour every night, on the ringing of 
a bell which was called The Curfew; introduced the Norman dresses 
and manners; made the Normans masters everywhere, and the English, 
servants; turned out the English bishops, and put Normans in their 
places; and showed himself to be the Conqueror indeed.

But, even with his own Normans, he had a restless life.  They were 
always hungering and thirsting for the riches of the English; and 
the more he gave, the more they wanted.  His priests were as greedy 
as his soldiers.  We know of only one Norman who plainly told his 
master, the King, that he had come with him to England to do his 
duty as a faithful servant, and that property taken by force from 
other men had no charms for him.  His name was GUILBERT.  We should 
not forget his name, for it is good to remember and to honour 
honest men.

Besides all these troubles, William the Conqueror was troubled by 
quarrels among his sons.  He had three living.  ROBERT, called 
CURTHOSE, because of his short legs; WILLIAM, called RUFUS or the 
Red, from the colour of his hair; and HENRY, fond of learning, and 
called, in the Norman language, BEAUCLERC, or Fine-Scholar.  When 
Robert grew up, he asked of his father the government of Normandy, 
which he had nominally possessed, as a child, under his mother, 
MATILDA.  The King refusing to grant it, Robert became jealous and 
discontented; and happening one day, while in this temper, to be 
ridiculed by his brothers, who threw water on him from a balcony as 
he was walking before the door, he drew his sword, rushed up-
stairs, and was only prevented by the King himself from putting 
them to death.  That same night, he hotly departed with some 
followers from his father's court, and endeavoured to take the 
Castle of Rouen by surprise.  Failing in this, he shut himself up 
in another Castle in Normandy, which the King besieged, and where 
Robert one day unhorsed and nearly killed him without knowing who 
he was.  His submission when he discovered his father, and the 
intercession of the queen and others, reconciled them; but not 
soundly; for Robert soon strayed abroad, and went from court to 
court with his complaints.  He was a gay, careless, thoughtless 
fellow, spending all he got on musicians and dancers; but his 
mother loved him, and often, against the King's command, supplied 
him with money through a messenger named SAMSON.  At length the 
incensed King swore he would tear out Samson's eyes; and Samson, 
thinking that his only hope of safety was in becoming a monk, 
became one, went on such errands no more, and kept his eyes in his 
head.

All this time, from the turbulent day of his strange coronation, 
the Conqueror had been struggling, you see, at any cost of cruelty 
and bloodshed, to maintain what he had seized.  All his reign, he 
struggled still, with the same object ever before him.  He was a 
stern, bold man, and he succeeded in it.

He loved money, and was particular in his eating, but he had only 
leisure to indulge one other passion, and that was his love of 
hunting.  He carried it to such a height that he ordered whole 
villages and towns to be swept away to make forests for the deer.  
Not satisfied with sixty-eight Royal Forests, he laid waste an 
immense district, to form another in Hampshire, called the New 
Forest.  The many thousands of miserable peasants who saw their 
little houses pulled down, and themselves and children turned into 
the open country without a shelter, detested him for his merciless 
addition to their many sufferings; and when, in the twenty-first 
year of his reign (which proved to be the last), he went over to 
Rouen, England was as full of hatred against him, as if every leaf 
on every tree in all his Royal Forests had been a curse upon his 
head.  In the New Forest, his son Richard (for he had four sons) 
had been gored to death by a Stag; and the people said that this so 
cruelly-made Forest would yet be fatal to others of the Conqueror's 
race.

He was engaged in a dispute with the King of France about some 
territory.  While he stayed at Rouen, negotiating with that King, 
he kept his bed and took medicines:  being advised by his 
physicians to do so, on account of having grown to an unwieldy 
size.  Word being brought to him that the King of France made light 
of this, and joked about it, he swore in a great rage that he 
should rue his jests.  He assembled his army, marched into the 
disputed territory, burnt - his old way! - the vines, the crops, 
and fruit, and set the town of Mantes on fire.  But, in an evil 
hour; for, as he rode over the hot ruins, his horse, setting his 
hoofs upon some burning embers, started, threw him forward against 
the pommel of the saddle, and gave him a mortal hurt.  For six 
weeks he lay dying in a monastery near Rouen, and then made his 
will, giving England to William, Normandy to Robert, and five 
thousand pounds to Henry.  And now, his violent deeds lay heavy on 
his mind.  He ordered money to be given to many English churches 
and monasteries, and - which was much better repentance - released 
his prisoners of state, some of whom had been confined in his 
dungeons twenty years.

It was a September morning, and the sun was rising, when the King 
was awakened from slumber by the sound of a church bell.  'What 
bell is that?' he faintly asked.  They told him it was the bell of 
the chapel of Saint Mary.  'I commend my soul,' said he, 'to Mary!' 
and died.

Think of his name, The Conqueror, and then consider how he lay in 
death!  The moment he was dead, his physicians, priests, and 
nobles, not knowing what contest for the throne might now take 
place, or what might happen in it, hastened away, each man for 
himself and his own property; the mercenary servants of the court 
began to rob and plunder; the body of the King, in the indecent 
strife, was rolled from the bed, and lay alone, for hours, upon the 
ground.  O Conqueror, of whom so many great names are proud now, of 
whom so many great names thought nothing then, it were better to 
have conquered one true heart, than England!

By-and-by, the priests came creeping in with prayers and candles; 
and a good knight, named HERLUIN, undertook (which no one else 
would do) to convey the body to Caen, in Normandy, in order that it 
might be buried in St. Stephen's church there, which the Conqueror 
had founded.  But fire, of which he had made such bad use in his 
life, seemed to follow him of itself in death.  A great 
conflagration broke out in the town when the body was placed in the 
church; and those present running out to extinguish the flames, it 
was once again left alone.

It was not even buried in peace.  It was about to be let down, in 
its Royal robes, into a tomb near the high altar, in presence of a 
great concourse of people, when a loud voice in the crowd cried 
out, 'This ground is mine!  Upon it, stood my father's house.  This 
King despoiled me of both ground and house to build this church.  
In the great name of GOD, I here forbid his body to be covered with 
the earth that is my right!'  The priests and bishops present, 
knowing the speaker's right, and knowing that the King had often 
denied him justice, paid him down sixty shillings for the grave.  
Even then, the corpse was not at rest.  The tomb was too small, and 
they tried to force it in.  It broke, a dreadful smell arose, the 
people hurried out into the air, and, for the third time, it was 
left alone.

Where were the Conqueror's three sons, that they were not at their 
father's burial?  Robert was lounging among minstrels, dancers, and 
gamesters, in France or Germany.  Henry was carrying his five 
thousand pounds safely away in a convenient chest he had got made.  
William the Red was hurrying to England, to lay hands upon the 
Royal treasure and the crown.



CHAPTER IX - ENGLAND UNDER WILLIAM THE SECOND, CALLED RUFUS



WILLIAM THE RED, in breathless haste, secured the three great forts 
of Dover, Pevensey, and Hastings, and made with hot speed for 
Winchester, where the Royal treasure was kept.  The treasurer 
delivering him the keys, he found that it amounted to sixty 
thousand pounds in silver, besides gold and jewels.  Possessed of 
this wealth, he soon persuaded the Archbishop of Canterbury to 
crown him, and became William the Second, King of England.

Rufus was no sooner on the throne, than he ordered into prison 
again the unhappy state captives whom his father had set free, and 
directed a goldsmith to ornament his father's tomb profusely with 
gold and silver.  It would have been more dutiful in him to have 
attended the sick Conqueror when he was dying; but England itself, 
like this Red King, who once governed it, has sometimes made 
expensive tombs for dead men whom it treated shabbily when they 
were alive.

The King's brother, Robert of Normandy, seeming quite content to be 
only Duke of that country; and the King's other brother, Fine-
Scholar, being quiet enough with his five thousand pounds in a 
chest; the King flattered himself, we may suppose, with the hope of 
an easy reign.  But easy reigns were difficult to have in those 
days.  The turbulent Bishop ODO (who had blessed the Norman army at 
the Battle of Hastings, and who, I dare say, took all the credit of 
the victory to himself) soon began, in concert with some powerful 
Norman nobles, to trouble the Red King.

The truth seems to be that this bishop and his friends, who had 
lands in England and lands in Normandy, wished to hold both under 
one Sovereign; and greatly preferred a thoughtless good-natured 
person, such as Robert was, to Rufus; who, though far from being an 
amiable man in any respect, was keen, and not to be imposed upon.  
They declared in Robert's favour, and retired to their castles 
(those castles were very troublesome to kings) in a sullen humour.  
The Red King, seeing the Normans thus falling from him, revenged 
himself upon them by appealing to the English; to whom he made a 
variety of promises, which he never meant to perform - in 
particular, promises to soften the cruelty of the Forest Laws; and 
who, in return, so aided him with their valour, that ODO was 
besieged in the Castle of Rochester, and forced to abandon it, and 
to depart from England for ever:  whereupon the other rebellious 
Norman nobles were soon reduced and scattered.

Then, the Red King went over to Normandy, where the people suffered 
greatly under the loose rule of Duke Robert.  The King's object was 
to seize upon the Duke's dominions.  This, the Duke, of course, 
prepared to resist; and miserable war between the two brothers 
seemed inevitable, when the powerful nobles on both sides, who had 
seen so much of war, interfered to prevent it.  A treaty was made.  
Each of the two brothers agreed to give up something of his claims, 
and that the longer-liver of the two should inherit all the 
dominions of the other.  When they had come to this loving 
understanding, they embraced and joined their forces against Fine-
Scholar; who had bought some territory of Robert with a part of his 
five thousand pounds, and was considered a dangerous individual in 
consequence.

St. Michael's Mount, in Normandy (there is another St. Michael's 
Mount, in Cornwall, wonderfully like it), was then, as it is now, a 
strong place perched upon the top of a high rock, around which, 
when the tide is in, the sea flows, leaving no road to the 
mainland.  In this place, Fine-Scholar shut himself up with his 
soldiers, and here he was closely besieged by his two brothers.  At 
one time, when he was reduced to great distress for want of water, 
the generous Robert not only permitted his men to get water, but 
sent Fine-Scholar wine from his own table; and, on being 
remonstrated with by the Red King, said 'What! shall we let our own 
brother die of thirst?  Where shall we get another, when he is 
gone?'  At another time, the Red King riding alone on the shore of 
the bay, looking up at the Castle, was taken by two of Fine-
Scholar's men, one of whom was about to kill him, when he cried 
out, 'Hold, knave!  I am the King of England!'  The story says that 
the soldier raised him from the ground respectfully and humbly, and 
that the King took him into his service.  The story may or may not 
be true; but at any rate it is true that Fine-Scholar could not 
hold out against his united brothers, and that he abandoned Mount 
St. Michael, and wandered about - as poor and forlorn as other 
scholars have been sometimes known to be.

The Scotch became unquiet in the Red King's time, and were twice 
defeated - the second time, with the loss of their King, Malcolm, 
and his son.  The Welsh became unquiet too.  Against them, Rufus 
was less successful; for they fought among their native mountains, 
and did great execution on the King's troops.  Robert of Normandy 
became unquiet too; and, complaining that his brother the King did 
not faithfully perform his part of their agreement, took up arms, 
and obtained assistance from the King of France, whom Rufus, in the 
end, bought off with vast sums of money.  England became unquiet 
too.  Lord Mowbray, the powerful Earl of Northumberland, headed a 
great conspiracy to depose the King, and to place upon the throne, 
STEPHEN, the Conqueror's near relative.  The plot was discovered; 
all the chief conspirators were seized; some were fined, some were 
put in prison, some were put to death.  The Earl of Northumberland 
himself was shut up in a dungeon beneath Windsor Castle, where he 
died, an old man, thirty long years afterwards.  The Priests in 
England were more unquiet than any other class or power; for the 
Red King treated them with such small ceremony that he refused to 
appoint new bishops or archbishops when the old ones died, but kept 
all the wealth belonging to those offices in his own hands.  In 
return for this, the Priests wrote his life when he was dead, and 
abused him well.  I am inclined to think, myself, that there was 
little to choose between the Priests and the Red King; that both 
sides were greedy and designing; and that they were fairly matched.

The Red King was false of heart, selfish, covetous, and mean.  He 
had a worthy minister in his favourite, Ralph, nicknamed - for 
almost every famous person had a nickname in those rough days - 
Flambard, or the Firebrand.  Once, the King being ill, became 
penitent, and made ANSELM, a foreign priest and a good man, 
Archbishop of Canterbury.  But he no sooner got well again than he 
repented of his repentance, and persisted in wrongfully keeping to 
himself some of the wealth belonging to the archbishopric.  This 
led to violent disputes, which were aggravated by there being in 
Rome at that time two rival Popes; each of whom declared he was the 
only real original infallible Pope, who couldn't make a mistake.  
At last, Anselm, knowing the Red King's character, and not feeling 
himself safe in England, asked leave to return abroad.  The Red 
King gladly gave it; for he knew that as soon as Anselm was gone, 
he could begin to store up all the Canterbury money again, for his 
own use.

By such means, and by taxing and oppressing the English people in 
every possible way, the Red King became very rich.  When he wanted 
money for any purpose, he raised it by some means or other, and 
cared nothing for the injustice he did, or the misery he caused.  
Having the opportunity of buying from Robert the whole duchy of 
Normandy for five years, he taxed the English people more than 
ever, and made the very convents sell their plate and valuables to 
supply him with the means to make the purchase.  But he was as 
quick and eager in putting down revolt as he was in raising money; 
for, a part of the Norman people objecting - very naturally, I 
think - to being sold in this way, he headed an army against them 
with all the speed and energy of his father.  He was so impatient, 
that he embarked for Normandy in a great gale of wind.  And when 
the sailors told him it was dangerous to go to sea in such angry 
weather, he replied, 'Hoist sail and away!  Did you ever hear of a 
king who was drowned?'

You will wonder how it was that even the careless Robert came to 
sell his dominions.  It happened thus.  It had long been the custom 
for many English people to make journeys to Jerusalem, which were 
called pilgrimages, in order that they might pray beside the tomb 
of Our Saviour there.  Jerusalem belonging to the Turks, and the 
Turks hating Christianity, these Christian travellers were often 
insulted and ill used.  The Pilgrims bore it patiently for some 
time, but at length a remarkable man, of great earnestness and 
eloquence, called PETER THE HERMIT, began to preach in various 
places against the Turks, and to declare that it was the duty of 
good Christians to drive away those unbelievers from the tomb of 
Our Saviour, and to take possession of it, and protect it.  An 
excitement such as the world had never known before was created.  
Thousands and thousands of men of all ranks and conditions departed 
for Jerusalem to make war against the Turks.  The war is called in 
history the first Crusade, and every Crusader wore a cross marked 
on his right shoulder.

All the Crusaders were not zealous Christians.  Among them were 
vast numbers of the restless, idle, profligate, and adventurous 
spirit of the time.  Some became Crusaders for the love of change; 
some, in the hope of plunder; some, because they had nothing to do 
at home; some, because they did what the priests told them; some, 
because they liked to see foreign countries; some, because they 
were fond of knocking men about, and would as soon knock a Turk 
about as a Christian.  Robert of Normandy may have been influenced 
by all these motives; and by a kind desire, besides, to save the 
Christian Pilgrims from bad treatment in future.  He wanted to 
raise a number of armed men, and to go to the Crusade.  He could 
not do so without money.  He had no money; and he sold his 
dominions to his brother, the Red King, for five years.  With the 
large sum he thus obtained, he fitted out his Crusaders gallantly, 
and went away to Jerusalem in martial state.  The Red King, who 
made money out of everything, stayed at home, busily squeezing more 
money out of Normans and English.

After three years of great hardship and suffering - from shipwreck 
at sea; from travel in strange lands; from hunger, thirst, and 
fever, upon the burning sands of the desert; and from the fury of 
the Turks - the valiant Crusaders got possession of Our Saviour's 
tomb.  The Turks were still resisting and fighting bravely, but 
this success increased the general desire in Europe to join the 
Crusade.  Another great French Duke was proposing to sell his 
dominions for a term to the rich Red King, when the Red King's 
reign came to a sudden and violent end.

You have not forgotten the New Forest which the Conqueror made, and 
which the miserable people whose homes he had laid waste, so hated.  
The cruelty of the Forest Laws, and the torture and death they 
brought upon the peasantry, increased this hatred.  The poor 
persecuted country people believed that the New Forest was 
enchanted.  They said that in thunder-storms, and on dark nights, 
demons appeared, moving beneath the branches of the gloomy trees.  
They said that a terrible spectre had foretold to Norman hunters 
that the Red King should be punished there.  And now, in the 
pleasant season of May, when the Red King had reigned almost 
thirteen years; and a second Prince of the Conqueror's blood - 
another Richard, the son of Duke Robert - was killed by an arrow in 
this dreaded Forest; the people said that the second time was not 
the last, and that there was another death to come.

It was a lonely forest, accursed in the people's hearts for the 
wicked deeds that had been done to make it; and no man save the 
King and his Courtiers and Huntsmen, liked to stray there.  But, in 
reality, it was like any other forest.  In the spring, the green 
leaves broke out of the buds; in the summer, flourished heartily, 
and made deep shades; in the winter, shrivelled and blew down, and 
lay in brown heaps on the moss.  Some trees were stately, and grew 
high and strong; some had fallen of themselves; some were felled by 
the forester's axe; some were hollow, and the rabbits burrowed at 
their roots; some few were struck by lightning, and stood white and 
bare.  There were hill-sides covered with rich fern, on which the 
morning dew so beautifully sparkled; there were brooks, where the 
deer went down to drink, or over which the whole herd bounded, 
flying from the arrows of the huntsmen; there were sunny glades, 
and solemn places where but little light came through the rustling 
leaves.  The songs of the birds in the New Forest were pleasanter 
to hear than the shouts of fighting men outside; and even when the 
Red King and his Court came hunting through its solitudes, cursing 
loud and riding hard, with a jingling of stirrups and bridles and 
knives and daggers, they did much less harm there than among the 
English or Normans, and the stags died (as they lived) far easier 
than the people.

Upon a day in August, the Red King, now reconciled to his brother, 
Fine-Scholar, came with a great train to hunt in the New Forest.  
Fine-Scholar was of the party.  They were a merry party, and had 
lain all night at Malwood-Keep, a hunting-lodge in the forest, 
where they had made good cheer, both at supper and breakfast, and 
had drunk a deal of wine.  The party dispersed in various 
directions, as the custom of hunters then was.  The King took with 
him only SIR WALTER TYRREL, who was a famous sportsman, and to whom 
he had given, before they mounted horse that morning, two fine 
arrows.

The last time the King was ever seen alive, he was riding with Sir 
Walter Tyrrel, and their dogs were hunting together.

It was almost night, when a poor charcoal-burner, passing through 
the forest with his cart, came upon the solitary body of a dead 
man, shot with an arrow in the breast, and still bleeding.  He got 
it into his cart.  It was the body of the King.  Shaken and 
tumbled, with its red beard all whitened with lime and clotted with 
blood, it was driven in the cart by the charcoal-burner next day to 
Winchester Cathedral, where it was received and buried.

Sir Walter Tyrrel, who escaped to Normandy, and claimed the 
protection of the King of France, swore in France that the Red King 
was suddenly shot dead by an arrow from an unseen hand, while they 
were hunting together; that he was fearful of being suspected as 
the King's murderer; and that he instantly set spurs to his horse, 
and fled to the sea-shore.  Others declared that the King and Sir 
Walter Tyrrel were hunting in company, a little before sunset, 
standing in bushes opposite one another, when a stag came between 
them.  That the King drew his bow and took aim, but the string 
broke.  That the King then cried, 'Shoot, Walter, in the Devil's 
name!'  That Sir Walter shot.  That the arrow glanced against a 
tree, was turned aside from the stag, and struck the King from his 
horse, dead.

By whose hand the Red King really fell, and whether that hand 
despatched the arrow to his breast by accident or by design, is 
only known to GOD.  Some think his brother may have caused him to 
be killed; but the Red King had made so many enemies, both among 
priests and people, that suspicion may reasonably rest upon a less 
unnatural murderer.  Men know no more than that he was found dead 
in the New Forest, which the suffering people had regarded as a 
doomed ground for his race.



CHAPTER X - ENGLAND UNDER HENRY THE FIRST, CALLED FINE-SCHOLAR



FINE-SCHOLAR, on hearing of the Red King's death, hurried to 
Winchester with as much speed as Rufus himself had made, to seize 
the Royal treasure.  But the keeper of the treasure who had been 
one of the hunting-party in the Forest, made haste to Winchester 
too, and, arriving there at about the same time, refused to yield 
it up.  Upon this, Fine-Scholar drew his sword, and threatened to 
kill the treasurer; who might have paid for his fidelity with his 
life, but that he knew longer resistance to be useless when he 
found the Prince supported by a company of powerful barons, who 
declared they were determined to make him King.  The treasurer, 
therefore, gave up the money and jewels of the Crown:  and on the 
third day after the death of the Red King, being a Sunday, Fine-
Scholar stood before the high altar in Westminster Abbey, and made 
a solemn declaration that he would resign the Church property which 
his brother had seized; that he would do no wrong to the nobles; 
and that he would restore to the people the laws of Edward the 
Confessor, with all the improvements of William the Conqueror.  So 
began the reign of KING HENRY THE FIRST.

The people were attached to their new King, both because he had 
known distresses, and because he was an Englishman by birth and not 
a Norman.  To strengthen this last hold upon them, the King wished 
to marry an English lady; and could think of no other wife than 
MAUD THE GOOD, the daughter of the King of Scotland.  Although this 
good Princess did not love the King, she was so affected by the 
representations the nobles made to her of the great charity it 
would be in her to unite the Norman and Saxon races, and prevent 
hatred and bloodshed between them for the future, that she 
consented to become his wife.  After some disputing among the 
priests, who said that as she had been in a convent in her youth, 
and had worn the veil of a nun, she could not lawfully be married - 
against which the Princess stated that her aunt, with whom she had 
lived in her youth, had indeed sometimes thrown a piece of black 
stuff over her, but for no other reason than because the nun's veil 
was the only dress the conquering Normans respected in girl or 
woman, and not because she had taken the vows of a nun, which she 
never had - she was declared free to marry, and was made King 
Henry's Queen.  A good Queen she was; beautiful, kind-hearted, and 
worthy of a better husband than the King.

For he was a cunning and unscrupulous man, though firm and clever.  
He cared very little for his word, and took any means to gain his 
ends.  All this is shown in his treatment of his brother Robert - 
Robert, who had suffered him to be refreshed with water, and who 
had sent him the wine from his own table, when he was shut up, with 
the crows flying below him, parched with thirst, in the castle on 
the top of St. Michael's Mount, where his Red brother would have 
let him die.

Before the King began to deal with Robert, he removed and disgraced 
all the favourites of the late King; who were for the most part 
base characters, much detested by the people.  Flambard, or 
Firebrand, whom the late King had made Bishop of Durham, of all 
things in the world, Henry imprisoned in the Tower; but Firebrand 
was a great joker and a jolly companion, and made himself so 
popular with his guards that they pretended to know nothing about a 
long rope that was sent into his prison at the bottom of a deep 
flagon of wine.  The guards took the wine, and Firebrand took the 
rope; with which, when they were fast asleep, he let himself down 
from a window in the night, and so got cleverly aboard ship and 
away to Normandy.

Now Robert, when his brother Fine-Scholar came to the throne, was 
still absent in the Holy Land.  Henry pretended that Robert had 
been made Sovereign of that country; and he had been away so long, 
that the ignorant people believed it.  But, behold, when Henry had 
been some time King of England, Robert came home to Normandy; 
having leisurely returned from Jerusalem through Italy, in which 
beautiful country he had enjoyed himself very much, and had married 
a lady as beautiful as itself!  In Normandy, he found Firebrand 
waiting to urge him to assert his claim to the English crown, and 
declare war against King Henry.  This, after great loss of time in 
feasting and dancing with his beautiful Italian wife among his 
Norman friends, he at last did.

The English in general were on King Henry's side, though many of 
the Normans were on Robert's.  But the English sailors deserted the 
King, and took a great part of the English fleet over to Normandy; 
so that Robert came to invade this country in no foreign vessels, 
but in English ships.  The virtuous Anselm, however, whom Henry had 
invited back from abroad, and made Archbishop of Canterbury, was 
steadfast in the King's cause; and it was so well supported that 
the two armies, instead of fighting, made a peace.  Poor Robert, 
who trusted anybody and everybody, readily trusted his brother, the 
King; and agreed to go home and receive a pension from England, on 
condition that all his followers were fully pardoned.  This the 
King very faithfully promised, but Robert was no sooner gone than 
he began to punish them.

Among them was the Earl of Shrewsbury, who, on being summoned by 
the King to answer to five-and-forty accusations, rode away to one 
of his strong castles, shut himself up therein, called around him 
his tenants and vassals, and fought for his liberty, but was 
defeated and banished.  Robert, with all his faults, was so true to 
his word, that when he first heard of this nobleman having risen 
against his brother, he laid waste the Earl of Shrewsbury's estates 
in Normandy, to show the King that he would favour no breach of 
their treaty.  Finding, on better information, afterwards, that the 
Earl's only crime was having been his friend, he came over to 
England, in his old thoughtless, warm-hearted way, to intercede 
with the King, and remind him of the solemn promise to pardon all 
his followers.

This confidence might have put the false King to the blush, but it 
did not.  Pretending to be very friendly, he so surrounded his 
brother with spies and traps, that Robert, who was quite in his 
power, had nothing for it but to renounce his pension and escape 
while he could.  Getting home to Normandy, and understanding the 
King better now, he naturally allied himself with his old friend 
the Earl of Shrewsbury, who had still thirty castles in that 
country.  This was exactly what Henry wanted.  He immediately 
declared that Robert had broken the treaty, and next year invaded 
Normandy.

He pretended that he came to deliver the Normans, at their own 
request, from his brother's misrule.  There is reason to fear that 
his misrule was bad enough; for his beautiful wife had died, 
leaving him with an infant son, and his court was again so 
careless, dissipated, and ill-regulated, that it was said he 
sometimes lay in bed of a day for want of clothes to put on - his 
attendants having stolen all his dresses.  But he headed his army 
like a brave prince and a gallant soldier, though he had the 
misfortune to be taken prisoner by King Henry, with four hundred of 
his Knights.  Among them was poor harmless Edgar Atheling, who 
loved Robert well.  Edgar was not important enough to be severe 
with.  The King afterwards gave him a small pension, which he lived 
upon and died upon, in peace, among the quiet woods and fields of 
England.

And Robert - poor, kind, generous, wasteful, heedless Robert, with 
so many faults, and yet with virtues that might have made a better 
and a happier man - what was the end of him?  If the King had had 
the magnanimity to say with a kind air, 'Brother, tell me, before 
these noblemen, that from this time you will be my faithful 
follower and friend, and never raise your hand against me or my 
forces more!' he might have trusted Robert to the death.  But the 
King was not a magnanimous man.  He sentenced his brother to be 
confined for life in one of the Royal Castles.  In the beginning of 
his imprisonment, he was allowed to ride out, guarded; but he one 
day broke away from his guard and galloped of.  He had the evil 
fortune to ride into a swamp, where his horse stuck fast and he was 
taken.  When the King heard of it he ordered him to be blinded, 
which was done by putting a red-hot metal basin on his eyes.

And so, in darkness and in prison, many years, he thought of all 
his past life, of the time he had wasted, of the treasure he had 
squandered, of the opportunities he had lost, of the youth he had 
thrown away, of the talents he had neglected.  Sometimes, on fine 
autumn mornings, he would sit and think of the old hunting parties 
in the free Forest, where he had been the foremost and the gayest.  
Sometimes, in the still nights, he would wake, and mourn for the 
many nights that had stolen past him at the gaming-table; 
sometimes, would seem to hear, upon the melancholy wind, the old 
songs of the minstrels; sometimes, would dream, in his blindness, 
of the light and glitter of the Norman Court.  Many and many a 
time, he groped back, in his fancy, to Jerusalem, where he had 
fought so well; or, at the head of his brave companions, bowed his 
feathered helmet to the shouts of welcome greeting him in Italy, 
and seemed again to walk among the sunny vineyards, or on the shore 
of the blue sea, with his lovely wife.  And then, thinking of her 
grave, and of his fatherless boy, he would stretch out his solitary 
arms and weep.

At length, one day, there lay in prison, dead, with cruel and 
disfiguring scars upon his eyelids, bandaged from his jailer's 
sight, but on which the eternal Heavens looked down, a worn old man 
of eighty.  He had once been Robert of Normandy.  Pity him!

At the time when Robert of Normandy was taken prisoner by his 
brother, Robert's little son was only five years old.  This child 
was taken, too, and carried before the King, sobbing and crying; 
for, young as he was, he knew he had good reason to be afraid of 
his Royal uncle.  The King was not much accustomed to pity those 
who were in his power, but his cold heart seemed for the moment to 
soften towards the boy.  He was observed to make a great effort, as 
if to prevent himself from being cruel, and ordered the child to be 
taken away; whereupon a certain Baron, who had married a daughter 
of Duke Robert's (by name, Helie of Saint Saen), took charge of 
him, tenderly.  The King's gentleness did not last long.  Before 
two years were over, he sent messengers to this lord's Castle to 
seize the child and bring him away.  The Baron was not there at the 
time, but his servants were faithful, and carried the boy off in 
his sleep and hid him.  When the Baron came home, and was told what 
the King had done, he took the child abroad, and, leading him by 
the hand, went from King to King and from Court to Court, relating 
how the child had a claim to the throne of England, and how his 
uncle the King, knowing that he had that claim, would have murdered 
him, perhaps, but for his escape.

The youth and innocence of the pretty little WILLIAM FITZ-ROBERT 
(for that was his name) made him many friends at that time.  When 
he became a young man, the King of France, uniting with the French 
Counts of Anjou and Flanders, supported his cause against the King 
of England, and took many of the King's towns and castles in 
Normandy.  But, King Henry, artful and cunning always, bribed some 
of William's friends with money, some with promises, some with 
power.  He bought off the Count of Anjou, by promising to marry his 
eldest son, also named WILLIAM, to the Count's daughter; and indeed 
the whole trust of this King's life was in such bargains, and he 
believed (as many another King has done since, and as one King did 
in France a very little time ago) that every man's truth and honour 
can be bought at some price.  For all this, he was so afraid of 
William Fitz-Robert and his friends, that, for a long time, he 
believed his life to be in danger; and never lay down to sleep, 
even in his palace surrounded by his guards, without having a sword 
and buckler at his bedside.

To strengthen his power, the King with great ceremony betrothed his 
eldest daughter MATILDA, then a child only eight years old, to be 
the wife of Henry the Fifth, the Emperor of Germany.  To raise her 
marriage-portion, he taxed the English people in a most oppressive 
manner; then treated them to a great procession, to restore their 
good humour; and sent Matilda away, in fine state, with the German 
ambassadors, to be educated in the country of her future husband.

And now his Queen, Maud the Good, unhappily died.  It was a sad 
thought for that gentle lady, that the only hope with which she had 
married a man whom she had never loved - the hope of reconciling 
the Norman and English races - had failed.  At the very time of her 
death, Normandy and all France was in arms against England; for, so 
soon as his last danger was over, King Henry had been false to all 
the French powers he had promised, bribed, and bought, and they had 
naturally united against him.  After some fighting, however, in 
which few suffered but the unhappy common people (who always 
suffered, whatsoever was the matter), he began to promise, bribe, 
and buy again; and by those means, and by the help of the Pope, who 
exerted himself to save more bloodshed, and by solemnly declaring, 
over and over again, that he really was in earnest this time, and 
would keep his word, the King made peace.

One of the first consequences of this peace was, that the King went 
over to Normandy with his son Prince William and a great retinue, 
to have the Prince acknowledged as his successor by the Norman 
Nobles, and to contract the promised marriage (this was one of the 
many promises the King had broken) between him and the daughter of 
the Count of Anjou.  Both these things were triumphantly done, with 
great show and rejoicing; and on the twenty-fifth of November, in 
the year one thousand one hundred and twenty, the whole retinue 
prepared to embark at the Port of Barfleur, for the voyage home.

On that day, and at that place, there came to the King, Fitz-
Stephen, a sea-captain, and said:

'My liege, my father served your father all his life, upon the sea.  
He steered the ship with the golden boy upon the prow, in which 
your father sailed to conquer England.  I beseech you to grant me 
the same office.  I have a fair vessel in the harbour here, called 
The White Ship, manned by fifty sailors of renown.  I pray you, 
Sire, to let your servant have the honour of steering you in The 
White Ship to England!'

'I am sorry, friend,' replied the King, 'that my vessel is already 
chosen, and that I cannot (therefore) sail with the son of the man 
who served my father.  But the Prince and all his company shall go 
along with you, in the fair White Ship, manned by the fifty sailors 
of renown.'

An hour or two afterwards, the King set sail in the vessel he had 
chosen, accompanied by other vessels, and, sailing all night with a 
fair and gentle wind, arrived upon the coast of England in the 
morning.  While it was yet night, the people in some of those ships 
heard a faint wild cry come over the sea, and wondered what it was.

Now, the Prince was a dissolute, debauched young man of eighteen, 
who bore no love to the English, and had declared that when he came 
to the throne he would yoke them to the plough like oxen.  He went 
aboard The White Ship, with one hundred and forty youthful Nobles 
like himself, among whom were eighteen noble ladies of the highest 
rank.  All this gay company, with their servants and the fifty 
sailors, made three hundred souls aboard the fair White Ship.

'Give three casks of wine, Fitz-Stephen,' said the Prince, 'to the 
fifty sailors of renown!  My father the King has sailed out of the 
harbour.  What time is there to make merry here, and yet reach 
England with the rest?'

'Prince!' said Fitz-Stephen, 'before morning, my fifty and The 
White Ship shall overtake the swiftest vessel in attendance on your 
father the King, if we sail at midnight!'

Then the Prince commanded to make merry; and the sailors drank out 
the three casks of wine; and the Prince and all the noble company 
danced in the moonlight on the deck of The White Ship.

When, at last, she shot out of the harbour of Barfleur, there was 
not a sober seaman on board.  But the sails were all set, and the 
oars all going merrily.  Fitz-Stephen had the helm.  The gay young 
nobles and the beautiful ladies, wrapped in mantles of various 
bright colours to protect them from the cold, talked, laughed, and 
sang.  The Prince encouraged the fifty sailors to row harder yet, 
for the honour of The White Ship.

Crash!  A terrific cry broke from three hundred hearts.  It was the 
cry the people in the distant vessels of the King heard faintly on 
the water.  The White Ship had struck upon a rock - was filling - 
going down!

Fitz-Stephen hurried the Prince into a boat, with some few Nobles.  
'Push off,' he whispered; 'and row to land.  It is not far, and the 
sea is smooth.  The rest of us must die.'

But, as they rowed away, fast, from the sinking ship, the Prince 
heard the voice of his sister MARIE, the Countess of Perche, 
calling for help.  He never in his life had been so good as he was 
then.  He cried in an agony, 'Row back at any risk!  I cannot bear 
to leave her!'

They rowed back.  As the Prince held out his arms to catch his 
sister, such numbers leaped in, that the boat was overset.  And in 
the same instant The White Ship went down.

Only two men floated.  They both clung to the main yard of the 
ship, which had broken from the mast, and now supported them.  One 
asked the other who he was?  He said, 'I am a nobleman, GODFREY by 
name, the son of GILBERT DE L'AIGLE.  And you?' said he.  'I am 
BEROLD, a poor butcher of Rouen,' was the answer.  Then, they said 
together, 'Lord be merciful to us both!' and tried to encourage one 
another, as they drifted in the cold benumbing sea on that 
unfortunate November night.

By-and-by, another man came swimming towards them, whom they knew, 
when he pushed aside his long wet hair, to be Fitz-Stephen.  'Where 
is the Prince?' said he.  'Gone! Gone!' the two cried together.  
'Neither he, nor his brother, nor his sister, nor the King's niece, 
nor her brother, nor any one of all the brave three hundred, noble 
or commoner, except we three, has risen above the water!'  Fitz-
Stephen, with a ghastly face, cried, 'Woe! woe, to me!' and sunk to 
the bottom.

The other two clung to the yard for some hours.  At length the 
young noble said faintly, 'I am exhausted, and chilled with the 
cold, and can hold no longer.  Farewell, good friend!  God preserve 
you!'  So, he dropped and sunk; and of all the brilliant crowd, the 
poor Butcher of Rouen alone was saved.  In the morning, some 
fishermen saw him floating in his sheep-skin coat, and got him into 
their boat - the sole relater of the dismal tale.

For three days, no one dared to carry the intelligence to the King.  
At length, they sent into his presence a little boy, who, weeping 
bitterly, and kneeling at his feet, told him that The White Ship 
was lost with all on board.  The King fell to the ground like a 
dead man, and never, never afterwards, was seen to smile.

But he plotted again, and promised again, and bribed and bought 
again, in his old deceitful way.  Having no son to succeed him, 
after all his pains ('The Prince will never yoke us to the plough, 
now!' said the English people), he took a second wife - ADELAIS or 
ALICE, a duke's daughter, and the Pope's niece.  Having no more 
children, however, he proposed to the Barons to swear that they 
would recognise as his successor, his daughter Matilda, whom, as 
she was now a widow, he married to the eldest son of the Count of 
Anjou, GEOFFREY, surnamed PLANTAGENET, from a custom he had of 
wearing a sprig of flowering broom (called Gent in French) in his 
cap for a feather.  As one false man usually makes many, and as a 
false King, in particular, is pretty certain to make a false Court, 
the Barons took the oath about the succession of Matilda (and her 
children after her), twice over, without in the least intending to 
keep it.  The King was now relieved from any remaining fears of 
William Fitz-Robert, by his death in the Monastery of St. Omer, in 
France, at twenty-six years old, of a pike-wound in the hand.  And 
as Matilda gave birth to three sons, he thought the succession to 
the throne secure.

He spent most of the latter part of his life, which was troubled by 
family quarrels, in Normandy, to be near Matilda.  When he had 
reigned upward of thirty-five years, and was sixty-seven years old, 
he died of an indigestion and fever, brought on by eating, when he 
was far from well, of a fish called Lamprey, against which he had 
often been cautioned by his physicians.  His remains were brought 
over to Reading Abbey to be buried.

You may perhaps hear the cunning and promise-breaking of King Henry 
the First, called 'policy' by some people, and 'diplomacy' by 
others.  Neither of these fine words will in the least mean that it 
was true; and nothing that is not true can possibly be good.

His greatest merit, that I know of, was his love of learning - I 
should have given him greater credit even for that, if it had been 
strong enough to induce him to spare the eyes of a certain poet he 
once took prisoner, who was a knight besides.  But he ordered the 
poet's eyes to be torn from his head, because he had laughed at him 
in his verses; and the poet, in the pain of that torture, dashed 
out his own brains against his prison wall.  King Henry the First 
was avaricious, revengeful, and so false, that I suppose a man 
never lived whose word was less to be relied upon.



CHAPTER XI - ENGLAND UNDER MATILDA AND STEPHEN



THE King was no sooner dead than all the plans and schemes he had 
laboured at so long, and lied so much for, crumbled away like a 
hollow heap of sand.  STEPHEN, whom he had never mistrusted or 
suspected, started up to claim the throne.

Stephen was the son of ADELA, the Conqueror's daughter, married to 
the Count of Blois.  To Stephen, and to his brother HENRY, the late 
King had been liberal; making Henry Bishop of Winchester, and 
finding a good marriage for Stephen, and much enriching him.  This 
did not prevent Stephen from hastily producing a false witness, a 
servant of the late King, to swear that the King had named him for 
his heir upon his death-bed.  On this evidence the Archbishop of 
Canterbury crowned him.  The new King, so suddenly made, lost not a 
moment in seizing the Royal treasure, and hiring foreign soldiers 
with some of it to protect his throne.

If the dead King had even done as the false witness said, he would 
have had small right to will away the English people, like so many 
sheep or oxen, without their consent.  But he had, in fact, 
bequeathed all his territory to Matilda; who, supported by ROBERT, 
Earl of Gloucester, soon began to dispute the crown.  Some of the 
powerful barons and priests took her side; some took Stephen's; all 
fortified their castles; and again the miserable English people 
were involved in war, from which they could never derive advantage 
whosoever was victorious, and in which all parties plundered, 
tortured, starved, and ruined them.

Five years had passed since the death of Henry the First - and 
during those five years there had been two terrible invasions by 
the people of Scotland under their King, David, who was at last 
defeated with all his army - when Matilda, attended by her brother 
Robert and a large force, appeared in England to maintain her 
claim.  A battle was fought between her troops and King Stephen's 
at Lincoln; in which the King himself was taken prisoner, after 
bravely fighting until his battle-axe and sword were broken, and 
was carried into strict confinement at Gloucester.  Matilda then 
submitted herself to the Priests, and the Priests crowned her Queen 
of England.

She did not long enjoy this dignity.  The people of London had a 
great affection for Stephen; many of the Barons considered it 
degrading to be ruled by a woman; and the Queen's temper was so 
haughty that she made innumerable enemies.  The people of London 
revolted; and, in alliance with the troops of Stephen, besieged her 
at Winchester, where they took her brother Robert prisoner, whom, 
as her best soldier and chief general, she was glad to exchange for 
Stephen himself, who thus regained his liberty.  Then, the long war 
went on afresh.  Once, she was pressed so hard in the Castle of 
Oxford, in the winter weather when the snow lay thick upon the 
ground, that her only chance of escape was to dress herself all in 
white, and, accompanied by no more than three faithful Knights, 
dressed in like manner that their figures might not be seen from 
Stephen's camp as they passed over the snow, to steal away on foot, 
cross the frozen Thames, walk a long distance, and at last gallop 
away on horseback.  All this she did, but to no great purpose then; 
for her brother dying while the struggle was yet going on, she at 
last withdrew to Normandy.

In two or three years after her withdrawal her cause appeared in 
England, afresh, in the person of her son Henry, young Plantagenet, 
who, at only eighteen years of age, was very powerful:  not only on 
account of his mother having resigned all Normandy to him, but also 
from his having married ELEANOR, the divorced wife of the French 
King, a bad woman, who had great possessions in France.  Louis, the 
French King, not relishing this arrangement, helped EUSTACE, King 
Stephen's son, to invade Normandy:  but Henry drove their united 
forces out of that country, and then returned here, to assist his 
partisans, whom the King was then besieging at Wallingford upon the 
Thames.  Here, for two days, divided only by the river, the two 
armies lay encamped opposite to one another - on the eve, as it 
seemed to all men, of another desperate fight, when the EARL OF 
ARUNDEL took heart and said 'that it was not reasonable to prolong 
the unspeakable miseries of two kingdoms to minister to the 
ambition of two princes.'

Many other noblemen repeating and supporting this when it was once 
uttered, Stephen and young Plantagenet went down, each to his own 
bank of the river, and held a conversation across it, in which they 
arranged a truce; very much to the dissatisfaction of Eustace, who 
swaggered away with some followers, and laid violent hands on the 
Abbey of St. Edmund's-Bury, where he presently died mad.  The truce 
led to a solemn council at Winchester, in which it was agreed that 
Stephen should retain the crown, on condition of his declaring 
Henry his successor; that WILLIAM, another son of the King's, 
should inherit his father's rightful possessions; and that all the 
Crown lands which Stephen had given away should be recalled, and 
all the Castles he had permitted to be built demolished.  Thus 
terminated the bitter war, which had now lasted fifteen years, and 
had again laid England waste.  In the next year STEPHEN died, after 
a troubled reign of nineteen years.

Although King Stephen was, for the time in which he lived, a humane 
and moderate man, with many excellent qualities; and although 
nothing worse is known of him than his usurpation of the Crown, 
which he probably excused to himself by the consideration that King 
Henry the First was a usurper too - which was no excuse at all; the 
people of England suffered more in these dread nineteen years, than 
at any former period even of their suffering history.  In the 
division of the nobility between the two rival claimants of the 
Crown, and in the growth of what is called the Feudal System (which 
made the peasants the born vassals and mere slaves of the Barons), 
every Noble had his strong Castle, where he reigned the cruel king 
of all the neighbouring people.  Accordingly, he perpetrated 
whatever cruelties he chose.  And never were worse cruelties 
committed upon earth than in wretched England in those nineteen 
years.

The writers who were living then describe them fearfully.  They say 
that the castles were filled with devils rather than with men; that 
the peasants, men and women, were put into dungeons for their gold 
and silver, were tortured with fire and smoke, were hung up by the 
thumbs, were hung up by the heels with great weights to their 
heads, were torn with jagged irons, killed with hunger, broken to 
death in narrow chests filled with sharp-pointed stones, murdered 
in countless fiendish ways.  In England there was no corn, no meat, 
no cheese, no butter, there were no tilled lands, no harvests.  
Ashes of burnt towns, and dreary wastes, were all that the 
traveller, fearful of the robbers who prowled abroad at all hours, 
would see in a long day's journey; and from sunrise until night, he 
would not come upon a home.

The clergy sometimes suffered, and heavily too, from pillage, but 
many of them had castles of their own, and fought in helmet and 
armour like the barons, and drew lots with other fighting men for 
their share of booty.  The Pope (or Bishop of Rome), on King 
Stephen's resisting his ambition, laid England under an Interdict 
at one period of this reign; which means that he allowed no service 
to be performed in the churches, no couples to be married, no bells 
to be rung, no dead bodies to be buried.  Any man having the power 
to refuse these things, no matter whether he were called a Pope or 
a Poulterer, would, of course, have the power of afflicting numbers 
of innocent people.  That nothing might be wanting to the miseries 
of King Stephen's time, the Pope threw in this contribution to the 
public store - not very like the widow's contribution, as I think, 
when Our Saviour sat in Jerusalem over-against the Treasury, 'and 
she threw in two mites, which make a farthing.'



CHAPTER XII - ENGLAND UNDER HENRY THE SECOND - PART THE FIRST



HENRY PLANTAGENET, when he was but twenty-one years old, quietly 
succeeded to the throne of England, according to his agreement made 
with the late King at Winchester.  Six weeks after Stephen's death, 
he and his Queen, Eleanor, were crowned in that city; into which 
they rode on horseback in great state, side by side, amidst much 
shouting and rejoicing, and clashing of music, and strewing of 
flowers.

The reign of King Henry the Second began well.  The King had great 
possessions, and (what with his own rights, and what with those of 
his wife) was lord of one-third part of France.  He was a young man 
of vigour, ability, and resolution, and immediately applied himself 
to remove some of the evils which had arisen in the last unhappy 
reign.  He revoked all the grants of land that had been hastily 
made, on either side, during the late struggles; he obliged numbers 
of disorderly soldiers to depart from England; he reclaimed all the 
castles belonging to the Crown; and he forced the wicked nobles to 
pull down their own castles, to the number of eleven hundred, in 
which such dismal cruelties had been inflicted on the people.  The 
King's brother, GEOFFREY, rose against him in France, while he was 
so well employed, and rendered it necessary for him to repair to 
that country; where, after he had subdued and made a friendly 
arrangement with his brother (who did not live long), his ambition 
to increase his possessions involved him in a war with the French 
King, Louis, with whom he had been on such friendly terms just 
before, that to the French King's infant daughter, then a baby in 
the cradle, he had promised one of his little sons in marriage, who 
was a child of five years old.  However, the war came to nothing at 
last, and the Pope made the two Kings friends again.

Now, the clergy, in the troubles of the last reign, had gone on 
very ill indeed.  There were all kinds of criminals among them - 
murderers, thieves, and vagabonds; and the worst of the matter was, 
that the good priests would not give up the bad priests to justice, 
when they committed crimes, but persisted in sheltering and 
defending them.  The King, well knowing that there could be no 
peace or rest in England while such things lasted, resolved to 
reduce the power of the clergy; and, when he had reigned seven 
years, found (as he considered) a good opportunity for doing so, in 
the death of the Archbishop of Canterbury.  'I will have for the 
new Archbishop,' thought the King, 'a friend in whom I can trust, 
who will help me to humble these rebellious priests, and to have 
them dealt with, when they do wrong, as other men who do wrong are 
dealt with.'  So, he resolved to make his favourite, the new 
Archbishop; and this favourite was so extraordinary a man, and his 
story is so curious, that I must tell you all about him.

Once upon a time, a worthy merchant of London, named GILBERT A 
BECKET, made a pilgrimage to the Holy Land, and was taken prisoner 
by a Saracen lord.  This lord, who treated him kindly and not like 
a slave, had one fair daughter, who fell in love with the merchant; 
and who told him that she wanted to become a Christian, and was 
willing to marry him if they could fly to a Christian country.  The 
merchant returned her love, until he found an opportunity to 
escape, when he did not trouble himself about the Saracen lady, but 
escaped with his servant Richard, who had been taken prisoner along 
with him, and arrived in England and forgot her.  The Saracen lady, 
who was more loving than the merchant, left her father's house in 
disguise to follow him, and made her way, under many hardships, to 
the sea-shore.  The merchant had taught her only two English words 
(for I suppose he must have learnt the Saracen tongue himself, and 
made love in that language), of which LONDON was one, and his own 
name, GILBERT, the other.  She went among the ships, saying, 
'London! London!' over and over again, until the sailors understood 
that she wanted to find an English vessel that would carry her 
there; so they showed her such a ship, and she paid for her passage 
with some of her jewels, and sailed away.  Well!  The merchant was 
sitting in his counting-house in London one day, when he heard a 
great noise in the street; and presently Richard came running in 
from the warehouse, with his eyes wide open and his breath almost 
gone, saying, 'Master, master, here is the Saracen lady!'  The 
merchant thought Richard was mad; but Richard said, 'No, master!  
As I live, the Saracen lady is going up and down the city, calling 
Gilbert!  Gilbert!'  Then, he took the merchant by the sleeve, and 
pointed out of window; and there they saw her among the gables and 
water-spouts of the dark, dirty street, in her foreign dress, so 
forlorn, surrounded by a wondering crowd, and passing slowly along, 
calling Gilbert, Gilbert!  When the merchant saw her, and thought 
of the tenderness she had shown him in his captivity, and of her 
constancy, his heart was moved, and he ran down into the street; 
and she saw him coming, and with a great cry fainted in his arms.  
They were married without loss of time, and Richard (who was an 
excellent man) danced with joy the whole day of the wedding; and 
they all lived happy ever afterwards.

This merchant and this Saracen lady had one son, THOMAS A BECKET.  
He it was who became the Favourite of King Henry the Second.

He had become Chancellor, when the King thought of making him 
Archbishop.  He was clever, gay, well educated, brave; had fought 
in several battles in France; had defeated a French knight in 
single combat, and brought his horse away as a token of the 
victory.  He lived in a noble palace, he was the tutor of the young 
Prince Henry, he was served by one hundred and forty knights, his 
riches were immense.  The King once sent him as his ambassador to 
France; and the French people, beholding in what state he 
travelled, cried out in the streets, 'How splendid must the King of 
England be, when this is only the Chancellor!'  They had good 
reason to wonder at the magnificence of Thomas a Becket, for, when 
he entered a French town, his procession was headed by two hundred 
and fifty singing boys; then, came his hounds in couples; then, 
eight waggons, each drawn by five horses driven by five drivers:  
two of the waggons filled with strong ale to be given away to the 
people; four, with his gold and silver plate and stately clothes; 
two, with the dresses of his numerous servants.  Then, came twelve 
horses, each with a monkey on his back; then, a train of people 
bearing shields and leading fine war-horses splendidly equipped; 
then, falconers with hawks upon their wrists; then, a host of 
knights, and gentlemen and priests; then, the Chancellor with his 
brilliant garments flashing in the sun, and all the people capering 
and shouting with delight.

The King was well pleased with all this, thinking that it only made 
himself the more magnificent to have so magnificent a favourite; 
but he sometimes jested with the Chancellor upon his splendour too.  
Once, when they were riding together through the streets of London 
in hard winter weather, they saw a shivering old man in rags.  
'Look at the poor object!' said the King.  'Would it not be a 
charitable act to give that aged man a comfortable warm cloak?'  
'Undoubtedly it would,' said Thomas a Becket, 'and you do well, 
Sir, to think of such Christian duties.'  'Come!' cried the King, 
'then give him your cloak!'  It was made of rich crimson trimmed 
with ermine.  The King tried to pull it off, the Chancellor tried 
to keep it on, both were near rolling from their saddles in the 
mud, when the Chancellor submitted, and the King gave the cloak to 
the old beggar:  much to the beggar's astonishment, and much to the 
merriment of all the courtiers in attendance.  For, courtiers are 
not only eager to laugh when the King laughs, but they really do 
enjoy a laugh against a Favourite.

'I will make,' thought King Henry the second, 'this Chancellor of 
mine, Thomas a Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury.  He will then be 
the head of the Church, and, being devoted to me, will help me to 
correct the Church.  He has always upheld my power against the 
power of the clergy, and once publicly told some bishops (I 
remember), that men of the Church were equally bound to me, with 
men of the sword.  Thomas a Becket is the man, of all other men in 
England, to help me in my great design.'  So the King, regardless 
of all objection, either that he was a fighting man, or a lavish 
man, or a courtly man, or a man of pleasure, or anything but a 
likely man for the office, made him Archbishop accordingly.

Now, Thomas a Becket was proud and loved to be famous.  He was 
already famous for the pomp of his life, for his riches, his gold 
and silver plate, his waggons, horses, and attendants.  He could do 
no more in that way than he had done; and being tired of that kind 
of fame (which is a very poor one), he longed to have his name 
celebrated for something else.  Nothing, he knew, would render him 
so famous in the world, as the setting of his utmost power and 
ability against the utmost power and ability of the King.  He 
resolved with the whole strength of his mind to do it.

He may have had some secret grudge against the King besides.  The 
King may have offended his proud humour at some time or other, for 
anything I know.  I think it likely, because it is a common thing 
for Kings, Princes, and other great people, to try the tempers of 
their favourites rather severely.  Even the little affair of the 
crimson cloak must have been anything but a pleasant one to a 
haughty man.  Thomas a Becket knew better than any one in England 
what the King expected of him.  In all his sumptuous life, he had 
never yet been in a position to disappoint the King.  He could take 
up that proud stand now, as head of the Church; and he determined 
that it should be written in history, either that he subdued the 
King, or that the King subdued him.

So, of a sudden, he completely altered the whole manner of his 
life.  He turned off all his brilliant followers, ate coarse food, 
drank bitter water, wore next his skin sackcloth covered with dirt 
and vermin (for it was then thought very religious to be very 
dirty), flogged his back to punish himself, lived chiefly in a 
little cell, washed the feet of thirteen poor people every day, and 
looked as miserable as he possibly could.  If he had put twelve 
hundred monkeys on horseback instead of twelve, and had gone in 
procession with eight thousand waggons instead of eight, he could 
not have half astonished the people so much as by this great 
change.  It soon caused him to be more talked about as an 
Archbishop than he had been as a Chancellor.

The King was very angry; and was made still more so, when the new 
Archbishop, claiming various estates from the nobles as being 
rightfully Church property, required the King himself, for the same 
reason, to give up Rochester Castle, and Rochester City too.  Not 
satisfied with this, he declared that no power but himself should 
appoint a priest to any Church in the part of England over which he 
was Archbishop; and when a certain gentleman of Kent made such an 
appointment, as he claimed to have the right to do, Thomas a Becket 
excommunicated him.

Excommunication was, next to the Interdict I told you of at the 
close of the last chapter, the great weapon of the clergy.  It 
consisted in declaring the person who was excommunicated, an 
outcast from the Church and from all religious offices; and in 
cursing him all over, from the top of his head to the sole of his 
foot, whether he was standing up, lying down, sitting, kneeling, 
walking, running, hopping, jumping, gaping, coughing, sneezing, or 
whatever else he was doing.  This unchristian nonsense would of 
course have made no sort of difference to the person cursed - who 
could say his prayers at home if he were shut out of church, and 
whom none but GOD could judge - but for the fears and superstitions 
of the people, who avoided excommunicated persons, and made their 
lives unhappy.  So, the King said to the New Archbishop, 'Take off 
this Excommunication from this gentleman of Kent.'  To which the 
Archbishop replied, 'I shall do no such thing.'

The quarrel went on.  A priest in Worcestershire committed a most 
dreadful murder, that aroused the horror of the whole nation.  The 
King demanded to have this wretch delivered up, to be tried in the 
same court and in the same way as any other murderer.  The 
Archbishop refused, and kept him in the Bishop's prison.  The King, 
holding a solemn assembly in Westminster Hall, demanded that in 
future all priests found guilty before their Bishops of crimes 
against the law of the land should be considered priests no longer, 
and should be delivered over to the law of the land for punishment.  
The Archbishop again refused.  The King required to know whether 
the clergy would obey the ancient customs of the country?  Every 
priest there, but one, said, after Thomas a Becket, 'Saving my 
order.'  This really meant that they would only obey those customs 
when they did not interfere with their own claims; and the King 
went out of the Hall in great wrath.

Some of the clergy began to be afraid, now, that they were going 
too far.  Though Thomas a Becket was otherwise as unmoved as 
Westminster Hall, they prevailed upon him, for the sake of their 
fears, to go to the King at Woodstock, and promise to observe the 
ancient customs of the country, without saying anything about his 
order.  The King received this submission favourably, and summoned 
a great council of the clergy to meet at the Castle of Clarendon, 
by Salisbury.  But when the council met, the Archbishop again 
insisted on the words 'saying my order;' and he still insisted, 
though lords entreated him, and priests wept before him and knelt 
to him, and an adjoining room was thrown open, filled with armed 
soldiers of the King, to threaten him.  At length he gave way, for 
that time, and the ancient customs (which included what the King 
had demanded in vain) were stated in writing, and were signed and 
sealed by the chief of the clergy, and were called the 
Constitutions of Clarendon.

The quarrel went on, for all that.  The Archbishop tried to see the 
King.  The King would not see him.  The Archbishop tried to escape 
from England.  The sailors on the coast would launch no boat to 
take him away.  Then, he again resolved to do his worst in 
opposition to the King, and began openly to set the ancient customs 
at defiance.

The King summoned him before a great council at Northampton, where 
he accused him of high treason, and made a claim against him, which 
was not a just one, for an enormous sum of money.  Thomas a Becket 
was alone against the whole assembly, and the very Bishops advised 
him to resign his office and abandon his contest with the King.  
His great anxiety and agitation stretched him on a sick-bed for two 
days, but he was still undaunted.  He went to the adjourned 
council, carrying a great cross in his right hand, and sat down 
holding it erect before him.  The King angrily retired into an 
inner room.  The whole assembly angrily retired and left him there.  
But there he sat.  The Bishops came out again in a body, and 
renounced him as a traitor.  He only said, 'I hear!' and sat there 
still.  They retired again into the inner room, and his trial 
proceeded without him.  By-and-by, the Earl of Leicester, heading 
the barons, came out to read his sentence.  He refused to hear it, 
denied the power of the court, and said he would refer his cause to 
the Pope.  As he walked out of the hall, with the cross in his 
hand, some of those present picked up rushes - rushes were strewn 
upon the floors in those days by way of carpet - and threw them at 
him.  He proudly turned his head, and said that were he not 
Archbishop, he would chastise those cowards with the sword he had 
known how to use in bygone days.  He then mounted his horse, and 
rode away, cheered and surrounded by the common people, to whom he 
threw open his house that night and gave a supper, supping with 
them himself.  That same night he secretly departed from the town; 
and so, travelling by night and hiding by day, and calling himself 
'Brother Dearman,' got away, not without difficulty, to Flanders.

The struggle still went on.  The angry King took possession of the 
revenues of the archbishopric, and banished all the relations and 
servants of Thomas a Becket, to the number of four hundred.  The 
Pope and the French King both protected him, and an abbey was 
assigned for his residence.  Stimulated by this support, Thomas a 
Becket, on a great festival day, formally proceeded to a great 
church crowded with people, and going up into the pulpit publicly 
cursed and excommunicated all who had supported the Constitutions 
of Clarendon:  mentioning many English noblemen by name, and not 
distantly hinting at the King of England himself.

When intelligence of this new affront was carried to the King in 
his chamber, his passion was so furious that he tore his clothes, 
and rolled like a madman on his bed of straw and rushes.  But he 
was soon up and doing.  He ordered all the ports and coasts of 
England to be narrowly watched, that no letters of Interdict might 
be brought into the kingdom; and sent messengers and bribes to the 
Pope's palace at Rome.  Meanwhile, Thomas a Becket, for his part, 
was not idle at Rome, but constantly employed his utmost arts in 
his own behalf.  Thus the contest stood, until there was peace 
between France and England (which had been for some time at war), 
and until the two children of the two Kings were married in 
celebration of it.  Then, the French King brought about a meeting 
between Henry and his old favourite, so long his enemy.

Even then, though Thomas a Becket knelt before the King, he was 
obstinate and immovable as to those words about his order.  King 
Louis of France was weak enough in his veneration for Thomas a 
Becket and such men, but this was a little too much for him.  He 
said that a Becket 'wanted to be greater than the saints and better 
than St. Peter,' and rode away from him with the King of England.  
His poor French Majesty asked a Becket's pardon for so doing, 
however, soon afterwards, and cut a very pitiful figure.

At last, and after a world of trouble, it came to this.  There was 
another meeting on French ground between King Henry and Thomas a 
Becket, and it was agreed that Thomas a Becket should be Archbishop 
of Canterbury, according to the customs of former Archbishops, and 
that the King should put him in possession of the revenues of that 
post.  And now, indeed, you might suppose the struggle at an end, 
and Thomas a Becket at rest.  NO, not even yet.  For Thomas a 
Becket hearing, by some means, that King Henry, when he was in 
dread of his kingdom being placed under an interdict, had had his 
eldest son Prince Henry secretly crowned, not only persuaded the 
Pope to suspend the Archbishop of York who had performed that 
ceremony, and to excommunicate the Bishops who had assisted at it, 
but sent a messenger of his own into England, in spite of all the 
King's precautions along the coast, who delivered the letters of 
excommunication into the Bishops' own hands.  Thomas a Becket then 
came over to England himself, after an absence of seven years.  He 
was privately warned that it was dangerous to come, and that an 
ireful knight, named RANULF DE BROC, had threatened that he should 
not live to eat a loaf of bread in England; but he came.

The common people received him well, and marched about with him in 
a soldierly way, armed with such rustic weapons as they could get.  
He tried to see the young prince who had once been his pupil, but 
was prevented.  He hoped for some little support among the nobles 
and priests, but found none.  He made the most of the peasants who 
attended him, and feasted them, and went from Canterbury to Harrow-
on-the-Hill, and from Harrow-on-the-Hill back to Canterbury, and on 
Christmas Day preached in the Cathedral there, and told the people 
in his sermon that he had come to die among them, and that it was 
likely he would be murdered.  He had no fear, however - or, if he 
had any, he had much more obstinacy - for he, then and there, 
excommunicated three of his enemies, of whom Ranulf de Broc, the 
ireful knight, was one.

As men in general had no fancy for being cursed, in their sitting 
and walking, and gaping and sneezing, and all the rest of it, it 
was very natural in the persons so freely excommunicated to 
complain to the King.  It was equally natural in the King, who had 
hoped that this troublesome opponent was at last quieted, to fall 
into a mighty rage when he heard of these new affronts; and, on the 
Archbishop of York telling him that he never could hope for rest 
while Thomas a Becket lived, to cry out hastily before his court, 
'Have I no one here who will deliver me from this man?'  There were 
four knights present, who, hearing the King's words, looked at one 
another, and went out.

The names of these knights were REGINALD FITZURSE, WILLIAM TRACY, 
HUGH DE MORVILLE, and RICHARD BRITO; three of whom had been in the 
train of Thomas a Becket in the old days of his splendour.  They 
rode away on horseback, in a very secret manner, and on the third 
day after Christmas Day arrived at Saltwood House, not far from 
Canterbury, which belonged to the family of Ranulf de Broc.  They 
quietly collected some followers here, in case they should need 
any; and proceeding to Canterbury, suddenly appeared (the four 
knights and twelve men) before the Archbishop, in his own house, at 
two o'clock in the afternoon.  They neither bowed nor spoke, but 
sat down on the floor in silence, staring at the Archbishop.

Thomas a Becket said, at length, 'What do you want?'

'We want,' said Reginald Fitzurse, 'the excommunication taken from 
the Bishops, and you to answer for your offences to the King.'  
Thomas a Becket defiantly replied, that the power of the clergy was 
above the power of the King.  That it was not for such men as they 
were, to threaten him.  That if he were threatened by all the 
swords in England, he would never yield.

'Then we will do more than threaten!' said the knights.  And they 
went out with the twelve men, and put on their armour, and drew 
their shining swords, and came back.

His servants, in the meantime, had shut up and barred the great 
gate of the palace.  At first, the knights tried to shatter it with 
their battle-axes; but, being shown a window by which they could 
enter, they let the gate alone, and climbed in that way.  While 
they were battering at the door, the attendants of Thomas a Becket 
had implored him to take refuge in the Cathedral; in which, as a 
sanctuary or sacred place, they thought the knights would dare to 
do no violent deed.  He told them, again and again, that he would 
not stir.  Hearing the distant voices of the monks singing the 
evening service, however, he said it was now his duty to attend, 
and therefore, and for no other reason, he would go.

There was a near way between his Palace and the Cathedral, by some 
beautiful old cloisters which you may yet see.  He went into the 
Cathedral, without any hurry, and having the Cross carried before 
him as usual.  When he was safely there, his servants would have 
fastened the door, but he said NO! it was the house of God and not 
a fortress.

As he spoke, the shadow of Reginald Fitzurse appeared in the 
Cathedral doorway, darkening the little light there was outside, on 
the dark winter evening.  This knight said, in a strong voice, 
'Follow me, loyal servants of the King!'  The rattle of the armour 
of the other knights echoed through the Cathedral, as they came 
clashing in.

It was so dark, in the lofty aisles and among the stately pillars 
of the church, and there were so many hiding-places in the crypt 
below and in the narrow passages above, that Thomas a Becket might 
even at that pass have saved himself if he would.  But he would 
not.  He told the monks resolutely that he would not.  And though 
they all dispersed and left him there with no other follower than 
EDWARD GRYME, his faithful cross-bearer, he was as firm then, as 
ever he had been in his life.

The knights came on, through the darkness, making a terrible noise 
with their armed tread upon the stone pavement of the church.  
'Where is the traitor?' they cried out.  He made no answer.  But 
when they cried, 'Where is the Archbishop?' he said proudly, 'I am 
here!' and came out of the shade and stood before them.

The knights had no desire to kill him, if they could rid the King 
and themselves of him by any other means.  They told him he must 
either fly or go with them.  He said he would do neither; and he 
threw William Tracy off with such force when he took hold of his 
sleeve, that Tracy reeled again.  By his reproaches and his 
steadiness, he so incensed them, and exasperated their fierce 
humour, that Reginald Fitzurse, whom he called by an ill name, 
said, 'Then die!' and struck at his head.  But the faithful Edward 
Gryme put out his arm, and there received the main force of the 
blow, so that it only made his master bleed.  Another voice from 
among the knights again called to Thomas a Becket to fly; but, with 
his blood running down his face, and his hands clasped, and his 
head bent, he commanded himself to God, and stood firm.  Then they 
cruelly killed him close to the altar of St. Bennet; and his body 
fell upon the pavement, which was dirtied with his blood and 
brains.

It is an awful thing to think of the murdered mortal, who had so 
showered his curses about, lying, all disfigured, in the church, 
where a few lamps here and there were but red specks on a pall of 
darkness; and to think of the guilty knights riding away on 
horseback, looking over their shoulders at the dim Cathedral, and 
remembering what they had left inside.


PART THE SECOND


WHEN the King heard how Thomas a Becket had lost his life in 
Canterbury Cathedral, through the ferocity of the four Knights, he 
was filled with dismay.  Some have supposed that when the King 
spoke those hasty words, 'Have I no one here who will deliver me 
from this man?' he wished, and meant a Becket to be slain.  But few 
things are more unlikely; for, besides that the King was not 
naturally cruel (though very passionate), he was wise, and must 
have known full well what any stupid man in his dominions must have 
known, namely, that such a murder would rouse the Pope and the 
whole Church against him.

He sent respectful messengers to the Pope, to represent his 
innocence (except in having uttered the hasty words); and he swore 
solemnly and publicly to his innocence, and contrived in time to 
make his peace.  As to the four guilty Knights, who fled into 
Yorkshire, and never again dared to show themselves at Court, the 
Pope excommunicated them; and they lived miserably for some time, 
shunned by all their countrymen.  At last, they went humbly to 
Jerusalem as a penance, and there died and were buried.

It happened, fortunately for the pacifying of the Pope, that an 
opportunity arose very soon after the murder of a Becket, for the 
King to declare his power in Ireland - which was an acceptable 
undertaking to the Pope, as the Irish, who had been converted to 
Christianity by one Patricius (otherwise Saint Patrick) long ago, 
before any Pope existed, considered that the Pope had nothing at 
all to do with them, or they with the Pope, and accordingly refused 
to pay him Peter's Pence, or that tax of a penny a house which I 
have elsewhere mentioned.  The King's opportunity arose in this 
way.

The Irish were, at that time, as barbarous a people as you can well 
imagine.  They were continually quarrelling and fighting, cutting 
one another's throats, slicing one another's noses, burning one 
another's houses, carrying away one another's wives, and committing 
all sorts of violence.  The country was divided into five kingdoms 
- DESMOND, THOMOND, CONNAUGHT, ULSTER, and LEINSTER - each governed 
by a separate King, of whom one claimed to be the chief of the 
rest.  Now, one of these Kings, named DERMOND MAC MURROUGH (a wild 
kind of name, spelt in more than one wild kind of way), had carried 
off the wife of a friend of his, and concealed her on an island in 
a bog.  The friend resenting this (though it was quite the custom 
of the country), complained to the chief King, and, with the chief 
King's help, drove Dermond Mac Murrough out of his dominions.  
Dermond came over to England for revenge; and offered to hold his 
realm as a vassal of King Henry, if King Henry would help him to 
regain it.  The King consented to these terms; but only assisted 
him, then, with what were called Letters Patent, authorising any 
English subjects who were so disposed, to enter into his service, 
and aid his cause.

There was, at Bristol, a certain EARL RICHARD DE CLARE, called 
STRONGBOW; of no very good character; needy and desperate, and 
ready for anything that offered him a chance of improving his 
fortunes.  There were, in South Wales, two other broken knights of 
the same good-for-nothing sort, called ROBERT FITZ-STEPHEN, and 
MAURICE FITZ-GERALD.  These three, each with a small band of 
followers, took up Dermond's cause; and it was agreed that if it 
proved successful, Strongbow should marry Dermond's daughter EVA, 
and be declared his heir.

The trained English followers of these knights were so superior in 
all the discipline of battle to the Irish, that they beat them 
against immense superiority of numbers.  In one fight, early in the 
war, they cut off three hundred heads, and laid them before Mac 
Murrough; who turned them every one up with his hands, rejoicing, 
and, coming to one which was the head of a man whom he had much 
disliked, grasped it by the hair and ears, and tore off the nose 
and lips with his teeth.  You may judge from this, what kind of a 
gentleman an Irish King in those times was.  The captives, all 
through this war, were horribly treated; the victorious party 
making nothing of breaking their limbs, and casting them into the 
sea from the tops of high rocks.  It was in the midst of the 
miseries and cruelties attendant on the taking of Waterford, where 
the dead lay piled in the streets, and the filthy gutters ran with 
blood, that Strongbow married Eva.  An odious marriage-company 
those mounds of corpse's must have made, I think, and one quite 
worthy of the young lady's father.

He died, after Waterford and Dublin had been taken, and various 
successes achieved; and Strongbow became King of Leinster.  Now 
came King Henry's opportunity.  To restrain the growing power of 
Strongbow, he himself repaired to Dublin, as Strongbow's Royal 
Master, and deprived him of his kingdom, but confirmed him in the 
enjoyment of great possessions.  The King, then, holding state in 
Dublin, received the homage of nearly all the Irish Kings and 
Chiefs, and so came home again with a great addition to his 
reputation as Lord of Ireland, and with a new claim on the favour 
of the Pope.  And now, their reconciliation was completed - more 
easily and mildly by the Pope, than the King might have expected, I 
think.

At this period of his reign, when his troubles seemed so few and 
his prospects so bright, those domestic miseries began which 
gradually made the King the most unhappy of men, reduced his great 
spirit, wore away his health, and broke his heart.

He had four sons.  HENRY, now aged eighteen - his secret crowning 
of whom had given such offence to Thomas a Becket.  RICHARD, aged 
sixteen; GEOFFREY, fifteen; and JOHN, his favourite, a young boy 
whom the courtiers named LACKLAND, because he had no inheritance, 
but to whom the King meant to give the Lordship of Ireland.  All 
these misguided boys, in their turn, were unnatural sons to him, 
and unnatural brothers to each other.  Prince Henry, stimulated by 
the French King, and by his bad mother, Queen Eleanor, began the 
undutiful history,

First, he demanded that his young wife, MARGARET, the French King's 
daughter, should be crowned as well as he.  His father, the King, 
consented, and it was done.  It was no sooner done, than he 
demanded to have a part of his father's dominions, during his 
father's life.  This being refused, he made off from his father in 
the night, with his bad heart full of bitterness, and took refuge 
at the French King's Court.  Within a day or two, his brothers 
Richard and Geoffrey followed.  Their mother tried to join them - 
escaping in man's clothes - but she was seized by King Henry's men, 
and immured in prison, where she lay, deservedly, for sixteen 
years.  Every day, however, some grasping English noblemen, to whom 
the King's protection of his people from their avarice and 
oppression had given offence, deserted him and joined the Princes.  
Every day he heard some fresh intelligence of the Princes levying 
armies against him; of Prince Henry's wearing a crown before his 
own ambassadors at the French Court, and being called the Junior 
King of England; of all the Princes swearing never to make peace 
with him, their father, without the consent and approval of the 
Barons of France.  But, with his fortitude and energy unshaken, 
King Henry met the shock of these disasters with a resolved and 
cheerful face.  He called upon all Royal fathers who had sons, to 
help him, for his cause was theirs; he hired, out of his riches, 
twenty thousand men to fight the false French King, who stirred his 
own blood against him; and he carried on the war with such vigour, 
that Louis soon proposed a conference to treat for peace.

The conference was held beneath an old wide-spreading green elm-
tree, upon a plain in France.  It led to nothing.  The war 
recommenced.  Prince Richard began his fighting career, by leading 
an army against his father; but his father beat him and his army 
back; and thousands of his men would have rued the day in which 
they fought in such a wicked cause, had not the King received news 
of an invasion of England by the Scots, and promptly come home 
through a great storm to repress it.  And whether he really began 
to fear that he suffered these troubles because a Becket had been 
murdered; or whether he wished to rise in the favour of the Pope, 
who had now declared a Becket to be a saint, or in the favour of 
his own people, of whom many believed that even a Becket's 
senseless tomb could work miracles, I don't know:  but the King no 
sooner landed in England than he went straight to Canterbury; and 
when he came within sight of the distant Cathedral, he dismounted 
from his horse, took off his shoes, and walked with bare and 
bleeding feet to a Becket's grave.  There, he lay down on the 
ground, lamenting, in the presence of many people; and by-and-by he 
went into the Chapter House, and, removing his clothes from his 
back and shoulders, submitted himself to be beaten with knotted 
cords (not beaten very hard, I dare say though) by eighty Priests, 
one after another.  It chanced that on the very day when the King 
made this curious exhibition of himself, a complete victory was 
obtained over the Scots; which very much delighted the Priests, who 
said that it was won because of his great example of repentance.  
For the Priests in general had found out, since a Becket's death, 
that they admired him of all things - though they had hated him 
very cordially when he was alive.

The Earl of Flanders, who was at the head of the base conspiracy of 
the King's undutiful sons and their foreign friends, took the 
opportunity of the King being thus employed at home, to lay siege 
to Rouen, the capital of Normandy.  But the King, who was 
extraordinarily quick and active in all his movements, was at 
Rouen, too, before it was supposed possible that he could have left 
England; and there he so defeated the said Earl of Flanders, that 
the conspirators proposed peace, and his bad sons Henry and 
Geoffrey submitted.  Richard resisted for six weeks; but, being 
beaten out of castle after castle, he at last submitted too, and 
his father forgave him.

To forgive these unworthy princes was only to afford them 
breathing-time for new faithlessness.  They were so false, 
disloyal, and dishonourable, that they were no more to be trusted 
than common thieves.  In the very next year, Prince Henry rebelled 
again, and was again forgiven.  In eight years more, Prince Richard 
rebelled against his elder brother; and Prince Geoffrey infamously 
said that the brothers could never agree well together, unless they 
were united against their father.  In the very next year after 
their reconciliation by the King, Prince Henry again rebelled 
against his father; and again submitted, swearing to be true; and 
was again forgiven; and again rebelled with Geoffrey.

But the end of this perfidious Prince was come.  He fell sick at a 
French town; and his conscience terribly reproaching him with his 
baseness, he sent messengers to the King his father, imploring him 
to come and see him, and to forgive him for the last time on his 
bed of death.  The generous King, who had a royal and forgiving 
mind towards his children always, would have gone; but this Prince 
had been so unnatural, that the noblemen about the King suspected 
treachery, and represented to him that he could not safely trust 
his life with such a traitor, though his own eldest son.  Therefore 
the King sent him a ring from off his finger as a token of 
forgiveness; and when the Prince had kissed it, with much grief and 
many tears, and had confessed to those around him how bad, and 
wicked, and undutiful a son he had been; he said to the attendant 
Priests:  'O, tie a rope about my body, and draw me out of bed, and 
lay me down upon a bed of ashes, that I may die with prayers to God 
in a repentant manner!'  And so he died, at twenty-seven years old.

Three years afterwards, Prince Geoffrey, being unhorsed at a 
tournament, had his brains trampled out by a crowd of horses 
passing over him.  So, there only remained Prince Richard, and 
Prince John - who had grown to be a young man now, and had solemnly 
sworn to be faithful to his father.  Richard soon rebelled again, 
encouraged by his friend the French King, PHILIP THE SECOND (son of 
Louis, who was dead); and soon submitted and was again forgiven, 
swearing on the New Testament never to rebel again; and in another 
year or so, rebelled again; and, in the presence of his father, 
knelt down on his knee before the King of France; and did the 
French King homage:  and declared that with his aid he would 
possess himself, by force, of all his father's French dominions.

And yet this Richard called himself a soldier of Our Saviour!  And 
yet this Richard wore the Cross, which the Kings of France and 
England had both taken, in the previous year, at a brotherly 
meeting underneath the old wide-spreading elm-tree on the plain, 
when they had sworn (like him) to devote themselves to a new 
Crusade, for the love and honour of the Truth!

Sick at heart, wearied out by the falsehood of his sons, and almost 
ready to lie down and die, the unhappy King who had so long stood 
firm, began to fail.  But the Pope, to his honour, supported him; 
and obliged the French King and Richard, though successful in 
fight, to treat for peace.  Richard wanted to be Crowned King of 
England, and pretended that he wanted to be married (which he 
really did not) to the French King's sister, his promised wife, 
whom King Henry detained in England.  King Henry wanted, on the 
other hand, that the French King's sister should be married to his 
favourite son, John:  the only one of his sons (he said) who had 
never rebelled against him.  At last King Henry, deserted by his 
nobles one by one, distressed, exhausted, broken-hearted, consented 
to establish peace.

One final heavy sorrow was reserved for him, even yet.  When they 
brought him the proposed treaty of peace, in writing, as he lay 
very ill in bed, they brought him also the list of the deserters 
from their allegiance, whom he was required to pardon.  The first 
name upon this list was John, his favourite son, in whom he had 
trusted to the last.

'O John! child of my heart!' exclaimed the King, in a great agony 
of mind.  'O John, whom I have loved the best!  O John, for whom I 
have contended through these many troubles!  Have you betrayed me 
too!'  And then he lay down with a heavy groan, and said, 'Now let 
the world go as it will.  I care for nothing more!'

After a time, he told his attendants to take him to the French town 
of Chinon - a town he had been fond of, during many years.  But he 
was fond of no place now; it was too true that he could care for 
nothing more upon this earth.  He wildly cursed the hour when he 
was born, and cursed the children whom he left behind him; and 
expired.

As, one hundred years before, the servile followers of the Court 
had abandoned the Conqueror in the hour of his death, so they now 
abandoned his descendant.  The very body was stripped, in the 
plunder of the Royal chamber; and it was not easy to find the means 
of carrying it for burial to the abbey church of Fontevraud.

Richard was said in after years, by way of flattery, to have the 
heart of a Lion.  It would have been far better, I think, to have 
had the heart of a Man.  His heart, whatever it was, had cause to 
beat remorsefully within his breast, when he came - as he did - 
into the solemn abbey, and looked on his dead father's uncovered 
face.  His heart, whatever it was, had been a black and perjured 
heart, in all its dealings with the deceased King, and more 
deficient in a single touch of tenderness than any wild beast's in 
the forest.

There is a pretty story told of this Reign, called the story of 
FAIR ROSAMOND.  It relates how the King doted on Fair Rosamond, who 
was the loveliest girl in all the world; and how he had a beautiful 
Bower built for her in a Park at Woodstock; and how it was erected 
in a labyrinth, and could only be found by a clue of silk.  How the 
bad Queen Eleanor, becoming jealous of Fair Rosamond, found out the 
secret of the clue, and one day, appeared before her, with a dagger 
and a cup of poison, and left her to the choice between those 
deaths.  How Fair Rosamond, after shedding many piteous tears and 
offering many useless prayers to the cruel Queen, took the poison, 
and fell dead in the midst of the beautiful bower, while the 
unconscious birds sang gaily all around her.

Now, there WAS a fair Rosamond, and she was (I dare say) the 
loveliest girl in all the world, and the King was certainly very 
fond of her, and the bad Queen Eleanor was certainly made jealous.  
But I am afraid - I say afraid, because I like the story so much - 
that there was no bower, no labyrinth, no silken clue, no dagger, 
no poison.  I am afraid fair Rosamond retired to a nunnery near 
Oxford, and died there, peaceably; her sister-nuns hanging a silken 
drapery over her tomb, and often dressing it with flowers, in 
remembrance of the youth and beauty that had enchanted the King 
when he too was young, and when his life lay fair before him.

It was dark and ended now; faded and gone.  Henry Plantagenet lay 
quiet in the abbey church of Fontevraud, in the fifty-seventh year 
of his age - never to be completed - after governing England well, 
for nearly thirty-five years.



CHAPTER XIII - ENGLAND UNDER RICHARD THE FIRST, CALLED THE LION-
HEART



IN the year of our Lord one thousand one hundred and eighty-nine, 
Richard of the Lion Heart succeeded to the throne of King Henry the 
Second, whose paternal heart he had done so much to break.  He had 
been, as we have seen, a rebel from his boyhood; but, the moment he 
became a king against whom others might rebel, he found out that 
rebellion was a great wickedness.  In the heat of this pious 
discovery, he punished all the leading people who had befriended 
him against his father.  He could scarcely have done anything that 
would have been a better instance of his real nature, or a better 
warning to fawners and parasites not to trust in lion-hearted 
princes.

He likewise put his late father's treasurer in chains, and locked 
him up in a dungeon from which he was not set free until he had 
relinquished, not only all the Crown treasure, but all his own 
money too.  So, Richard certainly got the Lion's share of the 
wealth of this wretched treasurer, whether he had a Lion's heart or 
not.

He was crowned King of England, with great pomp, at Westminster:  
walking to the Cathedral under a silken canopy stretched on the 
tops of four lances, each carried by a great lord.  On the day of 
his coronation, a dreadful murdering of the Jews took place, which 
seems to have given great delight to numbers of savage persons 
calling themselves Christians.  The King had issued a proclamation 
forbidding the Jews (who were generally hated, though they were the 
most useful merchants in England) to appear at the ceremony; but as 
they had assembled in London from all parts, bringing presents to 
show their respect for the new Sovereign, some of them ventured 
down to Westminster Hall with their gifts; which were very readily 
accepted.  It is supposed, now, that some noisy fellow in the 
crowd, pretending to be a very delicate Christian, set up a howl at 
this, and struck a Jew who was trying to get in at the Hall door 
with his present.  A riot arose.  The Jews who had got into the 
Hall, were driven forth; and some of the rabble cried out that the 
new King had commanded the unbelieving race to be put to death.  
Thereupon the crowd rushed through the narrow streets of the city, 
slaughtering all the Jews they met; and when they could find no 
more out of doors (on account of their having fled to their houses, 
and fastened themselves in), they ran madly about, breaking open 
all the houses where the Jews lived, rushing in and stabbing or 
spearing them, sometimes even flinging old people and children out 
of window into blazing fires they had lighted up below.  This great 
cruelty lasted four-and-twenty hours, and only three men were 
punished for it.  Even they forfeited their lives not for murdering 
and robbing the Jews, but for burning the houses of some 
Christians.

King Richard, who was a strong, restless, burly man, with one idea 
always in his head, and that the very troublesome idea of breaking 
the heads of other men, was mightily impatient to go on a Crusade 
to the Holy Land, with a great army.  As great armies could not be 
raised to go, even to the Holy Land, without a great deal of money, 
he sold the Crown domains, and even the high offices of State; 
recklessly appointing noblemen to rule over his English subjects, 
not because they were fit to govern, but because they could pay 
high for the privilege.  In this way, and by selling pardons at a 
dear rate and by varieties of avarice and oppression, he scraped 
together a large treasure.  He then appointed two Bishops to take 
care of his kingdom in his absence, and gave great powers and 
possessions to his brother John, to secure his friendship.  John 
would rather have been made Regent of England; but he was a sly 
man, and friendly to the expedition; saying to himself, no doubt, 
'The more fighting, the more chance of my brother being killed; and 
when he IS killed, then I become King John!'

Before the newly levied army departed from England, the recruits 
and the general populace distinguished themselves by astonishing 
cruelties on the unfortunate Jews:  whom, in many large towns, they 
murdered by hundreds in the most horrible manner.

At York, a large body of Jews took refuge in the Castle, in the 
absence of its Governor, after the wives and children of many of 
them had been slain before their eyes.  Presently came the 
Governor, and demanded admission.  'How can we give it thee, O 
Governor!' said the Jews upon the walls, 'when, if we open the gate 
by so much as the width of a foot, the roaring crowd behind thee 
will press in and kill us?'

Upon this, the unjust Governor became angry, and told the people 
that he approved of their killing those Jews; and a mischievous 
maniac of a friar, dressed all in white, put himself at the head of 
the assault, and they assaulted the Castle for three days.

Then said JOCEN, the head-Jew (who was a Rabbi or Priest), to the 
rest, 'Brethren, there is no hope for us with the Christians who 
are hammering at the gates and walls, and who must soon break in.  
As we and our wives and children must die, either by Christian 
hands, or by our own, let it be by our own.  Let us destroy by fire 
what jewels and other treasure we have here, then fire the castle, 
and then perish!'

A few could not resolve to do this, but the greater part complied.  
They made a blazing heap of all their valuables, and, when those 
were consumed, set the castle in flames.  While the flames roared 
and crackled around them, and shooting up into the sky, turned it 
blood-red, Jocen cut the throat of his beloved wife, and stabbed 
himself.  All the others who had wives or children, did the like 
dreadful deed.  When the populace broke in, they found (except the 
trembling few, cowering in corners, whom they soon killed) only 
heaps of greasy cinders, with here and there something like part of 
the blackened trunk of a burnt tree, but which had lately been a 
human creature, formed by the beneficent hand of the Creator as 
they were.

After this bad beginning, Richard and his troops went on, in no 
very good manner, with the Holy Crusade.  It was undertaken jointly 
by the King of England and his old friend Philip of France.  They 
commenced the business by reviewing their forces, to the number of 
one hundred thousand men.  Afterwards, they severally embarked 
their troops for Messina, in Sicily, which was appointed as the 
next place of meeting.

King Richard's sister had married the King of this place, but he 
was dead:  and his uncle TANCRED had usurped the crown, cast the 
Royal Widow into prison, and possessed himself of her estates.  
Richard fiercely demanded his sister's release, the restoration of 
her lands, and (according to the Royal custom of the Island) that 
she should have a golden chair, a golden table, four-and-twenty 
silver cups, and four-and-twenty silver dishes.  As he was too 
powerful to be successfully resisted, Tancred yielded to his 
demands; and then the French King grew jealous, and complained that 
the English King wanted to be absolute in the Island of Messina and 
everywhere else.  Richard, however, cared little or nothing for 
this complaint; and in consideration of a present of twenty 
thousand pieces of gold, promised his pretty little nephew ARTHUR, 
then a child of two years old, in marriage to Tancred's daughter.  
We shall hear again of pretty little Arthur by-and-by.

This Sicilian affair arranged without anybody's brains being 
knocked out (which must have rather disappointed him), King Richard 
took his sister away, and also a fair lady named BERENGARIA, with 
whom he had fallen in love in France, and whom his mother, Queen 
Eleanor (so long in prison, you remember, but released by Richard 
on his coming to the Throne), had brought out there to be his wife; 
and sailed with them for Cyprus.

He soon had the pleasure of fighting the King of the Island of 
Cyprus, for allowing his subjects to pillage some of the English 
troops who were shipwrecked on the shore; and easily conquering 
this poor monarch, he seized his only daughter, to be a companion 
to the lady Berengaria, and put the King himself into silver 
fetters.  He then sailed away again with his mother, sister, wife, 
and the captive princess; and soon arrived before the town of Acre, 
which the French King with his fleet was besieging from the sea.  
But the French King was in no triumphant condition, for his army 
had been thinned by the swords of the Saracens, and wasted by the 
plague; and SALADIN, the brave Sultan of the Turks, at the head of 
a numerous army, was at that time gallantly defending the place 
from the hills that rise above it.

Wherever the united army of Crusaders went, they agreed in few 
points except in gaming, drinking, and quarrelling, in a most 
unholy manner; in debauching the people among whom they tarried, 
whether they were friends or foes; and in carrying disturbance and 
ruin into quiet places.  The French King was jealous of the English 
King, and the English King was jealous of the French King, and the 
disorderly and violent soldiers of the two nations were jealous of 
one another; consequently, the two Kings could not at first agree, 
even upon a joint assault on Acre; but when they did make up their 
quarrel for that purpose, the Saracens promised to yield the town, 
to give up to the Christians the wood of the Holy Cross, to set at 
liberty all their Christian captives, and to pay two hundred 
thousand pieces of gold.  All this was to be done within forty 
days; but, not being done, King Richard ordered some three thousand 
Saracen prisoners to be brought out in the front of his camp, and 
there, in full view of their own countrymen, to be butchered.

The French King had no part in this crime; for he was by that time 
travelling homeward with the greater part of his men; being 
offended by the overbearing conduct of the English King; being 
anxious to look after his own dominions; and being ill, besides, 
from the unwholesome air of that hot and sandy country.  King 
Richard carried on the war without him; and remained in the East, 
meeting with a variety of adventures, nearly a year and a half.  
Every night when his army was on the march, and came to a halt, the 
heralds cried out three times, to remind all the soldiers of the 
cause in which they were engaged, 'Save the Holy Sepulchre!' and 
then all the soldiers knelt and said 'Amen!'  Marching or 
encamping, the army had continually to strive with the hot air of 
the glaring desert, or with the Saracen soldiers animated and 
directed by the brave Saladin, or with both together.  Sickness and 
death, battle and wounds, were always among them; but through every 
difficulty King Richard fought like a giant, and worked like a 
common labourer.  Long and long after he was quiet in his grave, 
his terrible battle-axe, with twenty English pounds of English 
steel in its mighty head, was a legend among the Saracens; and when 
all the Saracen and Christian hosts had been dust for many a year, 
if a Saracen horse started at any object by the wayside, his rider 
would exclaim, 'What dost thou fear, Fool?  Dost thou think King 
Richard is behind it?'

No one admired this King's renown for bravery more than Saladin 
himself, who was a generous and gallant enemy.  When Richard lay 
ill of a fever, Saladin sent him fresh fruits from Damascus, and 
snow from the mountain-tops.  Courtly messages and compliments were 
frequently exchanged between them - and then King Richard would 
mount his horse and kill as many Saracens as he could; and Saladin 
would mount his, and kill as many Christians as he could.  In this 
way King Richard fought to his heart's content at Arsoof and at 
Jaffa; and finding himself with nothing exciting to do at Ascalon, 
except to rebuild, for his own defence, some fortifications there 
which the Saracens had destroyed, he kicked his ally the Duke of 
Austria, for being too proud to work at them.

The army at last came within sight of the Holy City of Jerusalem; 
but, being then a mere nest of jealousy, and quarrelling and 
fighting, soon retired, and agreed with the Saracens upon a truce 
for three years, three months, three days, and three hours.  Then, 
the English Christians, protected by the noble Saladin from Saracen 
revenge, visited Our Saviour's tomb; and then King Richard embarked 
with a small force at Acre to return home.

But he was shipwrecked in the Adriatic Sea, and was fain to pass 
through Germany, under an assumed name.  Now, there were many 
people in Germany who had served in the Holy Land under that proud 
Duke of Austria who had been kicked; and some of them, easily 
recognising a man so remarkable as King Richard, carried their 
intelligence to the kicked Duke, who straightway took him prisoner 
at a little inn near Vienna.

The Duke's master the Emperor of Germany, and the King of France, 
were equally delighted to have so troublesome a monarch in safe 
keeping.  Friendships which are founded on a partnership in doing 
wrong, are never true; and the King of France was now quite as 
heartily King Richard's foe, as he had ever been his friend in his 
unnatural conduct to his father.  He monstrously pretended that 
King Richard had designed to poison him in the East; he charged him 
with having murdered, there, a man whom he had in truth befriended; 
he bribed the Emperor of Germany to keep him close prisoner; and, 
finally, through the plotting of these two princes, Richard was 
brought before the German legislature, charged with the foregoing 
crimes, and many others.  But he defended himself so well, that 
many of the assembly were moved to tears by his eloquence and 
earnestness.  It was decided that he should be treated, during the 
rest of his captivity, in a manner more becoming his dignity than 
he had been, and that he should be set free on the payment of a 
heavy ransom.  This ransom the English people willingly raised.  
When Queen Eleanor took it over to Germany, it was at first evaded 
and refused.  But she appealed to the honour of all the princes of 
the German Empire in behalf of her son, and appealed so well that 
it was accepted, and the King released.  Thereupon, the King of 
France wrote to Prince John - 'Take care of thyself.  The devil is 
unchained!'

Prince John had reason to fear his brother, for he had been a 
traitor to him in his captivity.  He had secretly joined the French 
King; had vowed to the English nobles and people that his brother 
was dead; and had vainly tried to seize the crown.  He was now in 
France, at a place called Evreux.  Being the meanest and basest of 
men, he contrived a mean and base expedient for making himself 
acceptable to his brother.  He invited the French officers of the 
garrison in that town to dinner, murdered them all, and then took 
the fortress.  With this recommendation to the good will of a lion-
hearted monarch, he hastened to King Richard, fell on his knees 
before him, and obtained the intercession of Queen Eleanor.  'I 
forgive him,' said the King, 'and I hope I may forget the injury he 
has done me, as easily as I know he will forget my pardon.'

While King Richard was in Sicily, there had been trouble in his 
dominions at home:  one of the bishops whom he had left in charge 
thereof, arresting the other; and making, in his pride and 
ambition, as great a show as if he were King himself.  But the King 
hearing of it at Messina, and appointing a new Regency, this 
LONGCHAMP (for that was his name) had fled to France in a woman's 
dress, and had there been encouraged and supported by the French 
King.  With all these causes of offence against Philip in his mind, 
King Richard had no sooner been welcomed home by his enthusiastic 
subjects with great display and splendour, and had no sooner been 
crowned afresh at Winchester, than he resolved to show the French 
King that the Devil was unchained indeed, and made war against him 
with great fury.

There was fresh trouble at home about this time, arising out of the 
discontents of the poor people, who complained that they were far 
more heavily taxed than the rich, and who found a spirited champion 
in WILLIAM FITZ-OSBERT, called LONGBEARD.  He became the leader of 
a secret society, comprising fifty thousand men; he was seized by 
surprise; he stabbed the citizen who first laid hands upon him; and 
retreated, bravely fighting, to a church, which he maintained four 
days, until he was dislodged by fire, and run through the body as 
he came out.  He was not killed, though; for he was dragged, half 
dead, at the tail of a horse to Smithfield, and there hanged.  
Death was long a favourite remedy for silencing the people's 
advocates; but as we go on with this history, I fancy we shall find 
them difficult to make an end of, for all that.

The French war, delayed occasionally by a truce, was still in 
progress when a certain Lord named VIDOMAR, Viscount of Limoges, 
chanced to find in his ground a treasure of ancient coins.  As the 
King's vassal, he sent the King half of it; but the King claimed 
the whole.  The lord refused to yield the whole.  The King besieged 
the lord in his castle, swore that he would take the castle by 
storm, and hang every man of its defenders on the battlements.

There was a strange old song in that part of the country, to the 
effect that in Limoges an arrow would be made by which King Richard 
would die.  It may be that BERTRAND DE GOURDON, a young man who was 
one of the defenders of the castle, had often sung it or heard it 
sung of a winter night, and remembered it when he saw, from his 
post upon the ramparts, the King attended only by his chief officer 
riding below the walls surveying the place.  He drew an arrow to 
the head, took steady aim, said between his teeth, 'Now I pray God 
speed thee well, arrow!' discharged it, and struck the King in the 
left shoulder.

Although the wound was not at first considered dangerous, it was 
severe enough to cause the King to retire to his tent, and direct 
the assault to be made without him.  The castle was taken; and 
every man of its defenders was hanged, as the King had sworn all 
should be, except Bertrand de Gourdon, who was reserved until the 
royal pleasure respecting him should be known.

By that time unskilful treatment had made the wound mortal and the 
King knew that he was dying.  He directed Bertrand to be brought 
into his tent.  The young man was brought there, heavily chained, 
King Richard looked at him steadily.  He looked, as steadily, at 
the King.

'Knave!' said King Richard.  'What have I done to thee that thou 
shouldest take my life?'

'What hast thou done to me?' replied the young man.  'With thine 
own hands thou hast killed my father and my two brothers.  Myself 
thou wouldest have hanged.  Let me die now, by any torture that 
thou wilt.  My comfort is, that no torture can save Thee.  Thou too 
must die; and, through me, the world is quit of thee!'

Again the King looked at the young man steadily.  Again the young 
man looked steadily at him.  Perhaps some remembrance of his 
generous enemy Saladin, who was not a Christian, came into the mind 
of the dying King.

'Youth!' he said, 'I forgive thee.  Go unhurt!'  Then, turning to 
the chief officer who had been riding in his company when he 
received the wound, King Richard said:

'Take off his chains, give him a hundred shillings, and let him 
depart.'

He sunk down on his couch, and a dark mist seemed in his weakened 
eyes to fill the tent wherein he had so often rested, and he died.  
His age was forty-two; he had reigned ten years.  His last command 
was not obeyed; for the chief officer flayed Bertrand de Gourdon 
alive, and hanged him.

There is an old tune yet known - a sorrowful air will sometimes 
outlive many generations of strong men, and even last longer than 
battle-axes with twenty pounds of steel in the head - by which this 
King is said to have been discovered in his captivity.  BLONDEL, a 
favourite Minstrel of King Richard, as the story relates, 
faithfully seeking his Royal master, went singing it outside the 
gloomy walls of many foreign fortresses and prisons; until at last 
he heard it echoed from within a dungeon, and knew the voice, and 
cried out in ecstasy, 'O Richard, O my King!'  You may believe it, 
if you like; it would be easy to believe worse things.  Richard was 
himself a Minstrel and a Poet.  If he had not been a Prince too, he 
might have been a better man perhaps, and might have gone out of 
the world with less bloodshed and waste of life to answer for.



CHAPTER XIV - ENGLAND UNDER KING JOHN, CALLED LACKLAND



AT two-and-thirty years of age, JOHN became King of England.  His 
pretty little nephew ARTHUR had the best claim to the throne; but 
John seized the treasure, and made fine promises to the nobility, 
and got himself crowned at Westminster within a few weeks after his 
brother Richard's death.  I doubt whether the crown could possibly 
have been put upon the head of a meaner coward, or a more 
detestable villain, if England had been searched from end to end to 
find him out.

The French King, Philip, refused to acknowledge the right of John 
to his new dignity, and declared in favour of Arthur.  You must not 
suppose that he had any generosity of feeling for the fatherless 
boy; it merely suited his ambitious schemes to oppose the King of 
England.  So John and the French King went to war about Arthur.

He was a handsome boy, at that time only twelve years old.  He was 
not born when his father, Geoffrey, had his brains trampled out at 
the tournament; and, besides the misfortune of never having known a 
father's guidance and protection, he had the additional misfortune 
to have a foolish mother (CONSTANCE by name), lately married to her 
third husband.  She took Arthur, upon John's accession, to the 
French King, who pretended to be very much his friend, and who made 
him a Knight, and promised him his daughter in marriage; but, who 
cared so little about him in reality, that finding it his interest 
to make peace with King John for a time, he did so without the 
least consideration for the poor little Prince, and heartlessly 
sacrificed all his interests.

Young Arthur, for two years afterwards, lived quietly; and in the 
course of that time his mother died.  But, the French King then 
finding it his interest to quarrel with King John again, again made 
Arthur his pretence, and invited the orphan boy to court.  'You 
know your rights, Prince,' said the French King, 'and you would 
like to be a King.  Is it not so?'  'Truly,' said Prince Arthur, 'I 
should greatly like to be a King!'  'Then,' said Philip, 'you shall 
have two hundred gentlemen who are Knights of mine, and with them 
you shall go to win back the provinces belonging to you, of which 
your uncle, the usurping King of England, has taken possession.  I 
myself, meanwhile, will head a force against him in Normandy.'  
Poor Arthur was so flattered and so grateful that he signed a 
treaty with the crafty French King, agreeing to consider him his 
superior Lord, and that the French King should keep for himself 
whatever he could take from King John.

Now, King John was so bad in all ways, and King Philip was so 
perfidious, that Arthur, between the two, might as well have been a 
lamb between a fox and a wolf.  But, being so young, he was ardent 
and flushed with hope; and, when the people of Brittany (which was 
his inheritance) sent him five hundred more knights and five 
thousand foot soldiers, he believed his fortune was made.  The 
people of Brittany had been fond of him from his birth, and had 
requested that he might be called Arthur, in remembrance of that 
dimly-famous English Arthur, of whom I told you early in this book, 
whom they believed to have been the brave friend and companion of 
an old King of their own.  They had tales among them about a 
prophet called MERLIN (of the same old time), who had foretold that 
their own King should be restored to them after hundreds of years; 
and they believed that the prophecy would be fulfilled in Arthur; 
that the time would come when he would rule them with a crown of 
Brittany upon his head; and when neither King of France nor King of 
England would have any power over them.  When Arthur found himself 
riding in a glittering suit of armour on a richly caparisoned 
horse, at the head of his train of knights and soldiers, he began 
to believe this too, and to consider old Merlin a very superior 
prophet.

He did not know - how could he, being so innocent and 
inexperienced? - that his little army was a mere nothing against 
the power of the King of England.  The French King knew it; but the 
poor boy's fate was little to him, so that the King of England was 
worried and distressed.  Therefore, King Philip went his way into 
Normandy and Prince Arthur went his way towards Mirebeau, a French 
town near Poictiers, both very well pleased.

Prince Arthur went to attack the town of Mirebeau, because his 
grandmother Eleanor, who has so often made her appearance in this 
history (and who had always been his mother's enemy), was living 
there, and because his Knights said, 'Prince, if you can take her 
prisoner, you will be able to bring the King your uncle to terms!'  
But she was not to be easily taken.  She was old enough by this 
time - eighty - but she was as full of stratagem as she was full of 
years and wickedness.  Receiving intelligence of young Arthur's 
approach, she shut herself up in a high tower, and encouraged her 
soldiers to defend it like men.  Prince Arthur with his little army 
besieged the high tower.  King John, hearing how matters stood, 
came up to the rescue, with HIS army.  So here was a strange 
family-party!  The boy-Prince besieging his grandmother, and his 
uncle besieging him!

This position of affairs did not last long.  One summer night King 
John, by treachery, got his men into the town, surprised Prince 
Arthur's force, took two hundred of his knights, and seized the 
Prince himself in his bed.  The Knights were put in heavy irons, 
and driven away in open carts drawn by bullocks, to various 
dungeons where they were most inhumanly treated, and where some of 
them were starved to death.  Prince Arthur was sent to the castle 
of Falaise.

One day, while he was in prison at that castle, mournfully thinking 
it strange that one so young should be in so much trouble, and 
looking out of the small window in the deep dark wall, at the 
summer sky and the birds, the door was softly opened, and he saw 
his uncle the King standing in the shadow of the archway, looking 
very grim.

'Arthur,' said the King, with his wicked eyes more on the stone 
floor than on his nephew, 'will you not trust to the gentleness, 
the friendship, and the truthfulness of your loving uncle?'

'I will tell my loving uncle that,' replied the boy, 'when he does 
me right.  Let him restore to me my kingdom of England, and then 
come to me and ask the question.'

The King looked at him and went out.  'Keep that boy close 
prisoner,' said he to the warden of the castle.

Then, the King took secret counsel with the worst of his nobles how 
the Prince was to be got rid of.  Some said, 'Put out his eyes and 
keep him in prison, as Robort of Normandy was kept.'  Others said, 
'Have him stabbed.'  Others, 'Have him hanged.'  Others, 'Have him 
poisoned.'

King John, feeling that in any case, whatever was done afterwards, 
it would be a satisfaction to his mind to have those handsome eyes 
burnt out that had looked at him so proudly while his own royal 
eyes were blinking at the stone floor, sent certain ruffians to 
Falaise to blind the boy with red-hot irons.  But Arthur so 
pathetically entreated them, and shed such piteous tears, and so 
appealed to HUBERT DE BOURG (or BURGH), the warden of the castle, 
who had a love for him, and was an honourable, tender man, that 
Hubert could not bear it.  To his eternal honour he prevented the 
torture from being performed, and, at his own risk, sent the 
savages away.

The chafed and disappointed King bethought himself of the stabbing 
suggestion next, and, with his shuffling manner and his cruel face, 
proposed it to one William de Bray.  'I am a gentleman and not an 
executioner,' said William de Bray, and left the presence with 
disdain.

But it was not difficult for a King to hire a murderer in those 
days.  King John found one for his money, and sent him down to the 
castle of Falaise.  'On what errand dost thou come?' said Hubert to 
this fellow.  'To despatch young Arthur,' he returned.  'Go back to 
him who sent thee,' answered Hubert, 'and say that I will do it!'

King John very well knowing that Hubert would never do it, but that 
he courageously sent this reply to save the Prince or gain time, 
despatched messengers to convey the young prisoner to the castle of 
Rouen.

Arthur was soon forced from the good Hubert - of whom he had never 
stood in greater need than then - carried away by night, and lodged 
in his new prison:  where, through his grated window, he could hear 
the deep waters of the river Seine, rippling against the stone wall 
below.

One dark night, as he lay sleeping, dreaming perhaps of rescue by 
those unfortunate gentlemen who were obscurely suffering and dying 
in his cause, he was roused, and bidden by his jailer to come down 
the staircase to the foot of the tower.  He hurriedly dressed 
himself and obeyed.  When they came to the bottom of the winding 
stairs, and the night air from the river blew upon their faces, the 
jailer trod upon his torch and put it out.  Then, Arthur, in the 
darkness, was hurriedly drawn into a solitary boat.  And in that 
boat, he found his uncle and one other man.

He knelt to them, and prayed them not to murder him.  Deaf to his 
entreaties, they stabbed him and sunk his body in the river with 
heavy stones.  When the spring-morning broke, the tower-door was 
closed, the boat was gone, the river sparkled on its way, and never 
more was any trace of the poor boy beheld by mortal eyes.

The news of this atrocious murder being spread in England, awakened 
a hatred of the King (already odious for his many vices, and for 
his having stolen away and married a noble lady while his own wife 
was living) that never slept again through his whole reign.  In 
Brittany, the indignation was intense.  Arthur's own sister ELEANOR 
was in the power of John and shut up in a convent at Bristol, but 
his half-sister ALICE was in Brittany.  The people chose her, and 
the murdered prince's father-in-law, the last husband of Constance, 
to represent them; and carried their fiery complaints to King 
Philip.  King Philip summoned King John (as the holder of territory 
in France) to come before him and defend himself.  King John 
refusing to appear, King Philip declared him false, perjured, and 
guilty; and again made war.  In a little time, by conquering the 
greater part of his French territory, King Philip deprived him of 
one-third of his dominions.  And, through all the fighting that 
took place, King John was always found, either to be eating and 
drinking, like a gluttonous fool, when the danger was at a 
distance, or to be running away, like a beaten cur, when it was 
near.

You might suppose that when he was losing his dominions at this 
rate, and when his own nobles cared so little for him or his cause 
that they plainly refused to follow his banner out of England, he 
had enemies enough.  But he made another enemy of the Pope, which 
he did in this way.

The Archbishop of Canterbury dying, and the junior monks of that 
place wishing to get the start of the senior monks in the 
appointment of his successor, met together at midnight, secretly 
elected a certain REGINALD, and sent him off to Rome to get the 
Pope's approval.  The senior monks and the King soon finding this 
out, and being very angry about it, the junior monks gave way, and 
all the monks together elected the Bishop of Norwich, who was the 
King's favourite.  The Pope, hearing the whole story, declared that 
neither election would do for him, and that HE elected STEPHEN 
LANGTON.  The monks submitting to the Pope, the King turned them 
all out bodily, and banished them as traitors.  The Pope sent three 
bishops to the King, to threaten him with an Interdict.  The King 
told the bishops that if any Interdict were laid upon his kingdom, 
he would tear out the eyes and cut off the noses of all the monks 
he could lay hold of, and send them over to Rome in that 
undecorated state as a present for their master.  The bishops, 
nevertheless, soon published the Interdict, and fled.

After it had lasted a year, the Pope proceeded to his next step; 
which was Excommunication.  King John was declared excommunicated, 
with all the usual ceremonies.  The King was so incensed at this, 
and was made so desperate by the disaffection of his Barons and the 
hatred of his people, that it is said he even privately sent 
ambassadors to the Turks in Spain, offering to renounce his 
religion and hold his kingdom of them if they would help him.  It 
is related that the ambassadors were admitted to the presence of 
the Turkish Emir through long lines of Moorish guards, and that 
they found the Emir with his eyes seriously fixed on the pages of a 
large book, from which he never once looked up.  That they gave him 
a letter from the King containing his proposals, and were gravely 
dismissed.  That presently the Emir sent for one of them, and 
conjured him, by his faith in his religion, to say what kind of man 
the King of England truly was?  That the ambassador, thus pressed, 
replied that the King of England was a false tyrant, against whom 
his own subjects would soon rise.  And that this was quite enough 
for the Emir.

Money being, in his position, the next best thing to men, King John 
spared no means of getting it.  He set on foot another oppressing 
and torturing of the unhappy Jews (which was quite in his way), and 
invented a new punishment for one wealthy Jew of Bristol.  Until 
such time as that Jew should produce a certain large sum of money, 
the King sentenced him to be imprisoned, and, every day, to have 
one tooth violently wrenched out of his head - beginning with the 
double teeth.  For seven days, the oppressed man bore the daily 
pain and lost the daily tooth; but, on the eighth, he paid the 
money.  With the treasure raised in such ways, the King made an 
expedition into Ireland, where some English nobles had revolted.  
It was one of the very few places from which he did not run away; 
because no resistance was shown.  He made another expedition into 
Wales - whence he DID run away in the end:  but not before he had 
got from the Welsh people, as hostages, twenty-seven young men of 
the best families; every one of whom he caused to be slain in the 
following year.

To Interdict and Excommunication, the Pope now added his last 
sentence; Deposition.  He proclaimed John no longer King, absolved 
all his subjects from their allegiance, and sent Stephen Langton 
and others to the King of France to tell him that, if he would 
invade England, he should be forgiven all his sins - at least, 
should be forgiven them by the Pope, if that would do.

As there was nothing that King Philip desired more than to invade 
England, he collected a great army at Rouen, and a fleet of 
seventeen hundred ships to bring them over.  But the English 
people, however bitterly they hated the King, were not a people to 
suffer invasion quietly.  They flocked to Dover, where the English 
standard was, in such great numbers to enrol themselves as 
defenders of their native land, that there were not provisions for 
them, and the King could only select and retain sixty thousand.  
But, at this crisis, the Pope, who had his own reasons for 
objecting to either King John or King Philip being too powerful, 
interfered.  He entrusted a legate, whose name was PANDOLF, with 
the easy task of frightening King John.  He sent him to the English 
Camp, from France, to terrify him with exaggerations of King 
Philip's power, and his own weakness in the discontent of the 
English Barons and people.  Pandolf discharged his commission so 
well, that King John, in a wretched panic, consented to acknowledge 
Stephen Langton; to resign his kingdom 'to God, Saint Peter, and 
Saint Paul' - which meant the Pope; and to hold it, ever 
afterwards, by the Pope's leave, on payment of an annual sum of 
money.  To this shameful contract he publicly bound himself in the 
church of the Knights Templars at Dover:  where he laid at the 
legate's feet a part of the tribute, which the legate haughtily 
trampled upon.  But they DO say, that this was merely a genteel 
flourish, and that he was afterwards seen to pick it up and pocket 
it.

There was an unfortunate prophet, the name of Peter, who had 
greatly increased King John's terrors by predicting that he would 
be unknighted (which the King supposed to signify that he would 
die) before the Feast of the Ascension should be past.  That was 
the day after this humiliation.  When the next morning came, and 
the King, who had been trembling all night, found himself alive and 
safe, he ordered the prophet - and his son too - to be dragged 
through the streets at the tails of horses, and then hanged, for 
having frightened him.

As King John had now submitted, the Pope, to King Philip's great 
astonishment, took him under his protection, and informed King 
Philip that he found he could not give him leave to invade England.  
The angry Philip resolved to do it without his leave but he gained 
nothing and lost much; for, the English, commanded by the Earl of 
Salisbury, went over, in five hundred ships, to the French coast, 
before the French fleet had sailed away from it, and utterly 
defeated the whole.

The Pope then took off his three sentences, one after another, and 
empowered Stephen Langton publicly to receive King John into the 
favour of the Church again, and to ask him to dinner.  The King, 
who hated Langton with all his might and main - and with reason 
too, for he was a great and a good man, with whom such a King could 
have no sympathy - pretended to cry and to be VERY grateful.  There 
was a little difficulty about settling how much the King should pay 
as a recompense to the clergy for the losses he had caused them; 
but, the end of it was, that the superior clergy got a good deal, 
and the inferior clergy got little or nothing - which has also 
happened since King John's time, I believe.

When all these matters were arranged, the King in his triumph 
became more fierce, and false, and insolent to all around him than 
he had ever been.  An alliance of sovereigns against King Philip, 
gave him an opportunity of landing an army in France; with which he 
even took a town!  But, on the French King's gaining a great 
victory, he ran away, of course, and made a truce for five years.

And now the time approached when he was to be still further 
humbled, and made to feel, if he could feel anything, what a 
wretched creature he was.  Of all men in the world, Stephen Langton 
seemed raised up by Heaven to oppose and subdue him.  When he 
ruthlessly burnt and destroyed the property of his own subjects, 
because their Lords, the Barons, would not serve him abroad, 
Stephen Langton fearlessly reproved and threatened him.  When he 
swore to restore the laws of King Edward, or the laws of King Henry 
the First, Stephen Langton knew his falsehood, and pursued him 
through all his evasions.  When the Barons met at the abbey of 
Saint Edmund's-Bury, to consider their wrongs and the King's 
oppressions, Stephen Langton roused them by his fervid words to 
demand a solemn charter of rights and liberties from their perjured 
master, and to swear, one by one, on the High Altar, that they 
would have it, or would wage war against him to the death.  When 
the King hid himself in London from the Barons, and was at last 
obliged to receive them, they told him roundly they would not 
believe him unless Stephen Langton became a surety that he would 
keep his word.  When he took the Cross to invest himself with some 
interest, and belong to something that was received with favour, 
Stephen Langton was still immovable.  When he appealed to the Pope, 
and the Pope wrote to Stephen Langton in behalf of his new 
favourite, Stephen Langton was deaf, even to the Pope himself, and 
saw before him nothing but the welfare of England and the crimes of 
the English King.

At Easter-time, the Barons assembled at Stamford, in Lincolnshire, 
in proud array, and, marching near to Oxford where the King was, 
delivered into the hands of Stephen Langton and two others, a list 
of grievances.  'And these,' they said, 'he must redress, or we 
will do it for ourselves!'  When Stephen Langton told the King as 
much, and read the list to him, he went half mad with rage.  But 
that did him no more good than his afterwards trying to pacify the 
Barons with lies.  They called themselves and their followers, 'The 
army of God and the Holy Church.'  Marching through the country, 
with the people thronging to them everywhere (except at 
Northampton, where they failed in an attack upon the castle), they 
at last triumphantly set up their banner in London itself, whither 
the whole land, tired of the tyrant, seemed to flock to join them.  
Seven knights alone, of all the knights in England, remained with 
the King; who, reduced to this strait, at last sent the Earl of 
Pembroke to the Barons to say that he approved of everything, and 
would meet them to sign their charter when they would.  'Then,' 
said the Barons, 'let the day be the fifteenth of June, and the 
place, Runny-Mead.'

On Monday, the fifteenth of June, one thousand two hundred and 
fourteen, the King came from Windsor Castle, and the Barons came 
from the town of Staines, and they met on Runny-Mead, which is 
still a pleasant meadow by the Thames, where rushes grow in the 
clear water of the winding river, and its banks are green with 
grass and trees.  On the side of the Barons, came the General of 
their army, ROBERT FITZ-WALTER, and a great concourse of the 
nobility of England.  With the King, came, in all, some four-and-
twenty persons of any note, most of whom despised him, and were 
merely his advisers in form.  On that great day, and in that great 
company, the King signed MAGNA CHARTA - the great charter of 
England - by which he pledged himself to maintain the Church in its 
rights; to relieve the Barons of oppressive obligations as vassals 
of the Crown - of which the Barons, in their turn, pledged 
themselves to relieve THEIR vassals, the people; to respect the 
liberties of London and all other cities and boroughs; to protect 
foreign merchants who came to England; to imprison no man without a 
fair trial; and to sell, delay, or deny justice to none.  As the 
Barons knew his falsehood well, they further required, as their 
securities, that he should send out of his kingdom all his foreign 
troops; that for two months they should hold possession of the city 
of London, and Stephen Langton of the Tower; and that five-and-
twenty of their body, chosen by themselves, should be a lawful 
committee to watch the keeping of the charter, and to make war upon 
him if he broke it.

All this he was obliged to yield.  He signed the charter with a 
smile, and, if he could have looked agreeable, would have done so, 
as he departed from the splendid assembly.  When he got home to 
Windsor Castle, he was quite a madman in his helpless fury.  And he 
broke the charter immediately afterwards.

He sent abroad for foreign soldiers, and sent to the Pope for help, 
and plotted to take London by surprise, while the Barons should be 
holding a great tournament at Stamford, which they had agreed to 
hold there as a celebration of the charter.  The Barons, however, 
found him out and put it off.  Then, when the Barons desired to see 
him and tax him with his treachery, he made numbers of appointments 
with them, and kept none, and shifted from place to place, and was 
constantly sneaking and skulking about.  At last he appeared at 
Dover, to join his foreign soldiers, of whom numbers came into his 
pay; and with them he besieged and took Rochester Castle, which was 
occupied by knights and soldiers of the Barons.  He would have 
hanged them every one; but the leader of the foreign soldiers, 
fearful of what the English people might afterwards do to him, 
interfered to save the knights; therefore the King was fain to 
satisfy his vengeance with the death of all the common men.  Then, 
he sent the Earl of Salisbury, with one portion of his army, to 
ravage the eastern part of his own dominions, while he carried fire 
and slaughter into the northern part; torturing, plundering, 
killing, and inflicting every possible cruelty upon the people; 
and, every morning, setting a worthy example to his men by setting 
fire, with his own monster-hands, to the house where he had slept 
last night.  Nor was this all; for the Pope, coming to the aid of 
his precious friend, laid the kingdom under an Interdict again, 
because the people took part with the Barons.  It did not much 
matter, for the people had grown so used to it now, that they had 
begun to think nothing about it.  It occurred to them - perhaps to 
Stephen Langton too - that they could keep their churches open, and 
ring their bells, without the Pope's permission as well as with it.  
So, they tried the experiment - and found that it succeeded 
perfectly.

It being now impossible to bear the country, as a wilderness of 
cruelty, or longer to hold any terms with such a forsworn outlaw of 
a King, the Barons sent to Louis, son of the French monarch, to 
offer him the English crown.  Caring as little for the Pope's 
excommunication of him if he accepted the offer, as it is possible 
his father may have cared for the Pope's forgiveness of his sins, 
he landed at Sandwich (King John immediately running away from 
Dover, where he happened to be), and went on to London.  The 
Scottish King, with whom many of the Northern English Lords had 
taken refuge; numbers of the foreign soldiers, numbers of the 
Barons, and numbers of the people went over to him every day; - 
King John, the while, continually running away in all directions.

The career of Louis was checked however, by the suspicions of the 
Barons, founded on the dying declaration of a French Lord, that 
when the kingdom was conquered he was sworn to banish them as 
traitors, and to give their estates to some of his own Nobles.  
Rather than suffer this, some of the Barons hesitated:  others even 
went over to King John.

It seemed to be the turning-point of King John's fortunes, for, in 
his savage and murderous course, he had now taken some towns and 
met with some successes.  But, happily for England and humanity, 
his death was near.  Crossing a dangerous quicksand, called the 
Wash, not very far from Wisbeach, the tide came up and nearly 
drowned his army.  He and his soldiers escaped; but, looking back 
from the shore when he was safe, he saw the roaring water sweep 
down in a torrent, overturn the waggons, horses, and men, that 
carried his treasure, and engulf them in a raging whirlpool from 
which nothing could be delivered.

Cursing, and swearing, and gnawing his fingers, he went on to 
Swinestead Abbey, where the monks set before him quantities of 
pears, and peaches, and new cider - some say poison too, but there 
is very little reason to suppose so - of which he ate and drank in 
an immoderate and beastly way.  All night he lay ill of a burning 
fever, and haunted with horrible fears.  Next day, they put him in 
a horse-litter, and carried him to Sleaford Castle, where he passed 
another night of pain and horror.  Next day, they carried him, with 
greater difficulty than on the day before, to the castle of Newark 
upon Trent; and there, on the eighteenth of October, in the forty-
ninth year of his age, and the seventeenth of his vile reign, was 
an end of this miserable brute.



CHAPTER XV - ENGLAND UNDER HENRY THE THIRD, CALLED, OF WINCHESTER



IF any of the English Barons remembered the murdered Arthur's 
sister, Eleanor the fair maid of Brittany, shut up in her convent 
at Bristol, none among them spoke of her now, or maintained her 
right to the Crown.  The dead Usurper's eldest boy, HENRY by name, 
was taken by the Earl of Pembroke, the Marshal of England, to the 
city of Gloucester, and there crowned in great haste when he was 
only ten years old.  As the Crown itself had been lost with the 
King's treasure in the raging water, and as there was no time to 
make another, they put a circle of plain gold upon his head 
instead.  'We have been the enemies of this child's father,' said 
Lord Pembroke, a good and true gentleman, to the few Lords who were 
present, 'and he merited our ill-will; but the child himself is 
innocent, and his youth demands our friendship and protection.'  
Those Lords felt tenderly towards the little boy, remembering their 
own young children; and they bowed their heads, and said, 'Long 
live King Henry the Third!'

Next, a great council met at Bristol, revised Magna Charta, and 
made Lord Pembroke Regent or Protector of England, as the King was 
too young to reign alone.  The next thing to be done, was to get 
rid of Prince Louis of France, and to win over those English Barons 
who were still ranged under his banner.  He was strong in many 
parts of England, and in London itself; and he held, among other 
places, a certain Castle called the Castle of Mount Sorel, in 
Leicestershire.  To this fortress, after some skirmishing and 
truce-making, Lord Pembroke laid siege.  Louis despatched an army 
of six hundred knights and twenty thousand soldiers to relieve it.  
Lord Pembroke, who was not strong enough for such a force, retired 
with all his men.  The army of the French Prince, which had marched 
there with fire and plunder, marched away with fire and plunder, 
and came, in a boastful swaggering manner, to Lincoln.  The town 
submitted; but the Castle in the town, held by a brave widow lady, 
named NICHOLA DE CAMVILLE (whose property it was), made such a 
sturdy resistance, that the French Count in command of the army of 
the French Prince found it necessary to besiege this Castle.  While 
he was thus engaged, word was brought to him that Lord Pembroke, 
with four hundred knights, two hundred and fifty men with cross-
bows, and a stout force both of horse and foot, was marching 
towards him.  'What care I?' said the French Count.  'The 
Englishman is not so mad as to attack me and my great army in a 
walled town!'  But the Englishman did it for all that, and did it - 
not so madly but so wisely, that he decoyed the great army into the 
narrow, ill-paved lanes and byways of Lincoln, where its horse-
soldiers could not ride in any strong body; and there he made such 
havoc with them, that the whole force surrendered themselves 
prisoners, except the Count; who said that he would never yield to 
any English traitor alive, and accordingly got killed.  The end of 
this victory, which the English called, for a joke, the Fair of 
Lincoln, was the usual one in those times - the common men were 
slain without any mercy, and the knights and gentlemen paid ransom 
and went home.

The wife of Louis, the fair BLANCHE OF CASTILE, dutifully equipped 
a fleet of eighty good ships, and sent it over from France to her 
husband's aid.  An English fleet of forty ships, some good and some 
bad, gallantly met them near the mouth of the Thames, and took or 
sunk sixty-five in one fight.  This great loss put an end to the 
French Prince's hopes.  A treaty was made at Lambeth, in virtue of 
which the English Barons who had remained attached to his cause 
returned to their allegiance, and it was engaged on both sides that 
the Prince and all his troops should retire peacefully to France.  
It was time to go; for war had made him so poor that he was obliged 
to borrow money from the citizens of London to pay his expenses 
home.

Lord Pembroke afterwards applied himself to governing the country 
justly, and to healing the quarrels and disturbances that had 
arisen among men in the days of the bad King John.  He caused Magna 
Charta to be still more improved, and so amended the Forest Laws 
that a Peasant was no longer put to death for killing a stag in a 
Royal Forest, but was only imprisoned.  It would have been well for 
England if it could have had so good a Protector many years longer, 
but that was not to be.  Within three years after the young King's 
Coronation, Lord Pembroke died; and you may see his tomb, at this 
day, in the old Temple Church in London.

The Protectorship was now divided.  PETER DE ROCHES, whom King John 
had made Bishop of Winchester, was entrusted with the care of the 
person of the young sovereign; and the exercise of the Royal 
authority was confided to EARL HUBERT DE BURGH.  These two 
personages had from the first no liking for each other, and soon 
became enemies.  When the young King was declared of age, Peter de 
Roches, finding that Hubert increased in power and favour, retired 
discontentedly, and went abroad.  For nearly ten years afterwards 
Hubert had full sway alone.

But ten years is a long time to hold the favour of a King.  This 
King, too, as he grew up, showed a strong resemblance to his 
father, in feebleness, inconsistency, and irresolution.  The best 
that can be said of him is that he was not cruel.  De Roches coming 
home again, after ten years, and being a novelty, the King began to 
favour him and to look coldly on Hubert.  Wanting money besides, 
and having made Hubert rich, he began to dislike Hubert.  At last 
he was made to believe, or pretended to believe, that Hubert had 
misappropriated some of the Royal treasure; and ordered him to 
furnish an account of all he had done in his administration.  
Besides which, the foolish charge was brought against Hubert that 
he had made himself the King's favourite by magic.  Hubert very 
well knowing that he could never defend himself against such 
nonsense, and that his old enemy must be determined on his ruin, 
instead of answering the charges fled to Merton Abbey.  Then the 
King, in a violent passion, sent for the Mayor of London, and said 
to the Mayor, 'Take twenty thousand citizens, and drag me Hubert de 
Burgh out of that abbey, and bring him here.'  The Mayor posted off 
to do it, but the Archbishop of Dublin (who was a friend of 
Hubert's) warning the King that an abbey was a sacred place, and 
that if he committed any violence there, he must answer for it to 
the Church, the King changed his mind and called the Mayor back, 
and declared that Hubert should have four months to prepare his 
defence, and should be safe and free during that time.

Hubert, who relied upon the King's word, though I think he was old 
enough to have known better, came out of Merton Abbey upon these 
conditions, and journeyed away to see his wife:  a Scottish 
Princess who was then at St. Edmund's-Bury.

Almost as soon as he had departed from the Sanctuary, his enemies 
persuaded the weak King to send out one SIR GODFREY DE CRANCUMB, 
who commanded three hundred vagabonds called the Black Band, with 
orders to seize him.  They came up with him at a little town in 
Essex, called Brentwood, when he was in bed.  He leaped out of bed, 
got out of the house, fled to the church, ran up to the altar, and 
laid his hand upon the cross.  Sir Godfrey and the Black Band, 
caring neither for church, altar, nor cross, dragged him forth to 
the church door, with their drawn swords flashing round his head, 
and sent for a Smith to rivet a set of chains upon him.  When the 
Smith (I wish I knew his name!) was brought, all dark and swarthy 
with the smoke of his forge, and panting with the speed he had 
made; and the Black Band, falling aside to show him the Prisoner, 
cried with a loud uproar, 'Make the fetters heavy! make them 
strong!' the Smith dropped upon his knee - but not to the Black 
Band - and said, 'This is the brave Earl Hubert de Burgh, who 
fought at Dover Castle, and destroyed the French fleet, and has 
done his country much good service.  You may kill me, if you like, 
but I will never make a chain for Earl Hubert de Burgh!'

The Black Band never blushed, or they might have blushed at this.  
They knocked the Smith about from one to another, and swore at him, 
and tied the Earl on horseback, undressed as he was, and carried 
him off to the Tower of London.  The Bishops, however, were so 
indignant at the violation of the Sanctuary of the Church, that the 
frightened King soon ordered the Black Band to take him back again; 
at the same time commanding the Sheriff of Essex to prevent his 
escaping out of Brentwood Church.  Well! the Sheriff dug a deep 
trench all round the church, and erected a high fence, and watched 
the church night and day; the Black Band and their Captain watched 
it too, like three hundred and one black wolves.  For thirty-nine 
days, Hubert de Burgh remained within.  At length, upon the 
fortieth day, cold and hunger were too much for him, and he gave 
himself up to the Black Band, who carried him off, for the second 
time, to the Tower.  When his trial came on, he refused to plead; 
but at last it was arranged that he should give up all the royal 
lands which had been bestowed upon him, and should be kept at the 
Castle of Devizes, in what was called 'free prison,' in charge of 
four knights appointed by four lords.  There, he remained almost a 
year, until, learning that a follower of his old enemy the Bishop 
was made Keeper of the Castle, and fearing that he might be killed 
by treachery, he climbed the ramparts one dark night, dropped from 
the top of the high Castle wall into the moat, and coming safely to 
the ground, took refuge in another church.  From this place he was 
delivered by a party of horse despatched to his help by some 
nobles, who were by this time in revolt against the King, and 
assembled in Wales.  He was finally pardoned and restored to his 
estates, but he lived privately, and never more aspired to a high 
post in the realm, or to a high place in the King's favour.  And 
thus end - more happily than the stories of many favourites of 
Kings - the adventures of Earl Hubert de Burgh.

The nobles, who had risen in revolt, were stirred up to rebellion 
by the overbearing conduct of the Bishop of Winchester, who, 
finding that the King secretly hated the Great Charter which had 
been forced from his father, did his utmost to confirm him in that 
dislike, and in the preference he showed to foreigners over the 
English.  Of this, and of his even publicly declaring that the 
Barons of England were inferior to those of France, the English 
Lords complained with such bitterness, that the King, finding them 
well supported by the clergy, became frightened for his throne, and 
sent away the Bishop and all his foreign associates.  On his 
marriage, however, with ELEANOR, a French lady, the daughter of the 
Count of Provence, he openly favoured the foreigners again; and so 
many of his wife's relations came over, and made such an immense 
family-party at court, and got so many good things, and pocketed so 
much money, and were so high with the English whose money they 
pocketed, that the bolder English Barons murmured openly about a 
clause there was in the Great Charter, which provided for the 
banishment of unreasonable favourites.  But, the foreigners only 
laughed disdainfully, and said, 'What are your English laws to us?'

King Philip of France had died, and had been succeeded by Prince 
Louis, who had also died after a short reign of three years, and 
had been succeeded by his son of the same name - so moderate and 
just a man that he was not the least in the world like a King, as 
Kings went.  ISABELLA, King Henry's mother, wished very much (for a 
certain spite she had) that England should make war against this 
King; and, as King Henry was a mere puppet in anybody's hands who 
knew how to manage his feebleness, she easily carried her point 
with him.  But, the Parliament were determined to give him no money 
for such a war.  So, to defy the Parliament, he packed up thirty 
large casks of silver - I don't know how he got so much; I dare say 
he screwed it out of the miserable Jews - and put them aboard ship, 
and went away himself to carry war into France:  accompanied by his 
mother and his brother Richard, Earl of Cornwall, who was rich and 
clever.  But he only got well beaten, and came home.

The good-humour of the Parliament was not restored by this.  They 
reproached the King with wasting the public money to make greedy 
foreigners rich, and were so stern with him, and so determined not 
to let him have more of it to waste if they could help it, that he 
was at his wit's end for some, and tried so shamelessly to get all 
he could from his subjects, by excuses or by force, that the people 
used to say the King was the sturdiest beggar in England.  He took 
the Cross, thinking to get some money by that means; but, as it was 
very well known that he never meant to go on a crusade, he got 
none.  In all this contention, the Londoners were particularly keen 
against the King, and the King hated them warmly in return.  Hating 
or loving, however, made no difference; he continued in the same 
condition for nine or ten years, when at last the Barons said that 
if he would solemnly confirm their liberties afresh, the Parliament 
would vote him a large sum.

As he readily consented, there was a great meeting held in 
Westminster Hall, one pleasant day in May, when all the clergy, 
dressed in their robes and holding every one of them a burning 
candle in his hand, stood up (the Barons being also there) while 
the Archbishop of Canterbury read the sentence of excommunication 
against any man, and all men, who should henceforth, in any way, 
infringe the Great Charter of the Kingdom.  When he had done, they 
all put out their burning candles with a curse upon the soul of any 
one, and every one, who should merit that sentence.  The King 
concluded with an oath to keep the Charter, 'As I am a man, as I am 
a Christian, as I am a Knight, as I am a King!'

It was easy to make oaths, and easy to break them; and the King did 
both, as his father had done before him.  He took to his old 
courses again when he was supplied with money, and soon cured of 
their weakness the few who had ever really trusted him.  When his 
money was gone, and he was once more borrowing and begging 
everywhere with a meanness worthy of his nature, he got into a 
difficulty with the Pope respecting the Crown of Sicily, which the 
Pope said he had a right to give away, and which he offered to King 
Henry for his second son, PRINCE EDMUND.  But, if you or I give 
away what we have not got, and what belongs to somebody else, it is 
likely that the person to whom we give it, will have some trouble 
in taking it.  It was exactly so in this case.  It was necessary to 
conquer the Sicilian Crown before it could be put upon young 
Edmund's head.  It could not be conquered without money.  The Pope 
ordered the clergy to raise money.  The clergy, however, were not 
so obedient to him as usual; they had been disputing with him for 
some time about his unjust preference of Italian Priests in 
England; and they had begun to doubt whether the King's chaplain, 
whom he allowed to be paid for preaching in seven hundred churches, 
could possibly be, even by the Pope's favour, in seven hundred 
places at once.  'The Pope and the King together,' said the Bishop 
of London, 'may take the mitre off my head; but, if they do, they 
will find that I shall put on a soldier's helmet.  I pay nothing.'  
The Bishop of Worcester was as bold as the Bishop of London, and 
would pay nothing either.  Such sums as the more timid or more 
helpless of the clergy did raise were squandered away, without 
doing any good to the King, or bringing the Sicilian Crown an inch 
nearer to Prince Edmund's head.  The end of the business was, that 
the Pope gave the Crown to the brother of the King of France (who 
conquered it for himself), and sent the King of England in, a bill 
of one hundred thousand pounds for the expenses of not having won 
it.

The King was now so much distressed that we might almost pity him, 
if it were possible to pity a King so shabby and ridiculous.  His 
clever brother, Richard, had bought the title of King of the Romans 
from the German people, and was no longer near him, to help him 
with advice.  The clergy, resisting the very Pope, were in alliance 
with the Barons.  The Barons were headed by SIMON DE MONTFORT, Earl 
of Leicester, married to King Henry's sister, and, though a 
foreigner himself, the most popular man in England against the 
foreign favourites.  When the King next met his Parliament, the 
Barons, led by this Earl, came before him, armed from head to foot, 
and cased in armour.  When the Parliament again assembled, in a 
month's time, at Oxford, this Earl was at their head, and the King 
was obliged to consent, on oath, to what was called a Committee of 
Government:  consisting of twenty-four members:  twelve chosen by 
the Barons, and twelve chosen by himself.

But, at a good time for him, his brother Richard came back.  
Richard's first act (the Barons would not admit him into England on 
other terms) was to swear to be faithful to the Committee of 
Government - which he immediately began to oppose with all his 
might.  Then, the Barons began to quarrel among themselves; 
especially the proud Earl of Gloucester with the Earl of Leicester, 
who went abroad in disgust.  Then, the people began to be 
dissatisfied with the Barons, because they did not do enough for 
them.  The King's chances seemed so good again at length, that he 
took heart enough - or caught it from his brother - to tell the 
Committee of Government that he abolished them - as to his oath, 
never mind that, the Pope said! - and to seize all the money in the 
Mint, and to shut himself up in the Tower of London.  Here he was 
joined by his eldest son, Prince Edward; and, from the Tower, he 
made public a letter of the Pope's to the world in general, 
informing all men that he had been an excellent and just King for 
five-and-forty years.

As everybody knew he had been nothing of the sort, nobody cared 
much for this document.  It so chanced that the proud Earl of 
Gloucester dying, was succeeded by his son; and that his son, 
instead of being the enemy of the Earl of Leicester, was (for the 
time) his friend.  It fell out, therefore, that these two Earls 
joined their forces, took several of the Royal Castles in the 
country, and advanced as hard as they could on London.  The London 
people, always opposed to the King, declared for them with great 
joy.  The King himself remained shut up, not at all gloriously, in 
the Tower.  Prince Edward made the best of his way to Windsor 
Castle.  His mother, the Queen, attempted to follow him by water; 
but, the people seeing her barge rowing up the river, and hating 
her with all their hearts, ran to London Bridge, got together a 
quantity of stones and mud, and pelted the barge as it came 
through, crying furiously, 'Drown the Witch!  Drown her!'  They 
were so near doing it, that the Mayor took the old lady under his 
protection, and shut her up in St. Paul's until the danger was 
past.

It would require a great deal of writing on my part, and a great 
deal of reading on yours, to follow the King through his disputes 
with the Barons, and to follow the Barons through their disputes 
with one another - so I will make short work of it for both of us, 
and only relate the chief events that arose out of these quarrels.  
The good King of France was asked to decide between them.  He gave 
it as his opinion that the King must maintain the Great Charter, 
and that the Barons must give up the Committee of Government, and 
all the rest that had been done by the Parliament at Oxford:  which 
the Royalists, or King's party, scornfully called the Mad 
Parliament.  The Barons declared that these were not fair terms, 
and they would not accept them.  Then they caused the great bell of 
St. Paul's to be tolled, for the purpose of rousing up the London 
people, who armed themselves at the dismal sound and formed quite 
an army in the streets.  I am sorry to say, however, that instead 
of falling upon the King's party with whom their quarrel was, they 
fell upon the miserable Jews, and killed at least five hundred of 
them.  They pretended that some of these Jews were on the King's 
side, and that they kept hidden in their houses, for the 
destruction of the people, a certain terrible composition called 
Greek Fire, which could not be put out with water, but only burnt 
the fiercer for it.  What they really did keep in their houses was 
money; and this their cruel enemies wanted, and this their cruel 
enemies took, like robbers and murderers.

The Earl of Leicester put himself at the head of these Londoners 
and other forces, and followed the King to Lewes in Sussex, where 
he lay encamped with his army.  Before giving the King's forces 
battle here, the Earl addressed his soldiers, and said that King 
Henry the Third had broken so many oaths, that he had become the 
enemy of God, and therefore they would wear white crosses on their 
breasts, as if they were arrayed, not against a fellow-Christian, 
but against a Turk.  White-crossed accordingly, they rushed into 
the fight.  They would have lost the day - the King having on his 
side all the foreigners in England:  and, from Scotland, JOHN 
COMYN, JOHN BALIOL, and ROBERT BRUCE, with all their men - but for 
the impatience of PRINCE EDWARD, who, in his hot desire to have 
vengeance on the people of London, threw the whole of his father's 
army into confusion.  He was taken Prisoner; so was the King; so 
was the King's brother the King of the Romans; and five thousand 
Englishmen were left dead upon the bloody grass.

For this success, the Pope excommunicated the Earl of Leicester:  
which neither the Earl nor the people cared at all about.  The 
people loved him and supported him, and he became the real King; 
having all the power of the government in his own hands, though he 
was outwardly respectful to King Henry the Third, whom he took with 
him wherever he went, like a poor old limp court-card.  He summoned 
a Parliament (in the year one thousand two hundred and sixty-five) 
which was the first Parliament in England that the people had any 
real share in electing; and he grew more and more in favour with 
the people every day, and they stood by him in whatever he did.

Many of the other Barons, and particularly the Earl of Gloucester, 
who had become by this time as proud as his father, grew jealous of 
this powerful and popular Earl, who was proud too, and began to 
conspire against him.  Since the battle of Lewes, Prince Edward had 
been kept as a hostage, and, though he was otherwise treated like a 
Prince, had never been allowed to go out without attendants 
appointed by the Earl of Leicester, who watched him.  The 
conspiring Lords found means to propose to him, in secret, that 
they should assist him to escape, and should make him their leader; 
to which he very heartily consented.

So, on a day that was agreed upon, he said to his attendants after 
dinner (being then at Hereford), 'I should like to ride on 
horseback, this fine afternoon, a little way into the country.'  As 
they, too, thought it would be very pleasant to have a canter in 
the sunshine, they all rode out of the town together in a gay 
little troop.  When they came to a fine level piece of turf, the 
Prince fell to comparing their horses one with another, and 
offering bets that one was faster than another; and the attendants, 
suspecting no harm, rode galloping matches until their horses were 
quite tired.  The Prince rode no matches himself, but looked on 
from his saddle, and staked his money.  Thus they passed the whole 
merry afternoon.  Now, the sun was setting, and they were all going 
slowly up a hill, the Prince's horse very fresh and all the other 
horses very weary, when a strange rider mounted on a grey steed 
appeared at the top of the hill, and waved his hat.  'What does the 
fellow mean?' said the attendants one to another.  The Prince 
answered on the instant by setting spurs to his horse, dashing away 
at his utmost speed, joining the man, riding into the midst of a 
little crowd of horsemen who were then seen waiting under some 
trees, and who closed around him; and so he departed in a cloud of 
dust, leaving the road empty of all but the baffled attendants, who 
sat looking at one another, while their horses drooped their ears 
and panted.

The Prince joined the Earl of Gloucester at Ludlow.  The Earl of 
Leicester, with a part of the army and the stupid old King, was at 
Hereford.  One of the Earl of Leicester's sons, Simon de Montfort, 
with another part of the army, was in Sussex.  To prevent these two 
parts from uniting was the Prince's first object.  He attacked 
Simon de Montfort by night, defeated him, seized his banners and 
treasure, and forced him into Kenilworth Castle in Warwickshire, 
which belonged to his family.

His father, the Earl of Leicester, in the meanwhile, not knowing 
what had happened, marched out of Hereford, with his part of the 
army and the King, to meet him.  He came, on a bright morning in 
August, to Evesham, which is watered by the pleasant river Avon.  
Looking rather anxiously across the prospect towards Kenilworth, he 
saw his own banners advancing; and his face brightened with joy.  
But, it clouded darkly when he presently perceived that the banners 
were captured, and in the enemy's hands; and he said, 'It is over.  
The Lord have mercy on our souls, for our bodies are Prince 
Edward's!'

He fought like a true Knight, nevertheless.  When his horse was 
killed under him, he fought on foot.  It was a fierce battle, and 
the dead lay in heaps everywhere.  The old King, stuck up in a suit 
of armour on a big war-horse, which didn't mind him at all, and 
which carried him into all sorts of places where he didn't want to 
go, got into everybody's way, and very nearly got knocked on the 
head by one of his son's men.  But he managed to pipe out, 'I am 
Harry of Winchester!' and the Prince, who heard him, seized his 
bridle, and took him out of peril.  The Earl of Leicester still 
fought bravely, until his best son Henry was killed, and the bodies 
of his best friends choked his path; and then he fell, still 
fighting, sword in hand.  They mangled his body, and sent it as a 
present to a noble lady - but a very unpleasant lady, I should 
think - who was the wife of his worst enemy.  They could not mangle 
his memory in the minds of the faithful people, though.  Many years 
afterwards, they loved him more than ever, and regarded him as a 
Saint, and always spoke of him as 'Sir Simon the Righteous.'

And even though he was dead, the cause for which he had fought 
still lived, and was strong, and forced itself upon the King in the 
very hour of victory.  Henry found himself obliged to respect the 
Great Charter, however much he hated it, and to make laws similar 
to the laws of the Great Earl of Leicester, and to be moderate and 
forgiving towards the people at last - even towards the people of 
London, who had so long opposed him.  There were more risings 
before all this was done, but they were set at rest by these means, 
and Prince Edward did his best in all things to restore peace.  One 
Sir Adam de Gourdon was the last dissatisfied knight in arms; but, 
the Prince vanquished him in single combat, in a wood, and nobly 
gave him his life, and became his friend, instead of slaying him.  
Sir Adam was not ungrateful.  He ever afterwards remained devoted 
to his generous conqueror.

When the troubles of the Kingdom were thus calmed, Prince Edward 
and his cousin Henry took the Cross, and went away to the Holy 
Land, with many English Lords and Knights.  Four years afterwards 
the King of the Romans died, and, next year (one thousand two 
hundred and seventy-two), his brother the weak King of England 
died.  He was sixty-eight years old then, and had reigned fifty-six 
years.  He was as much of a King in death, as he had ever been in 
life.  He was the mere pale shadow of a King at all times.



CHAPTER XVI - ENGLAND UNDER EDWARD THE FIRST, CALLED LONGSHANKS



IT was now the year of our Lord one thousand two hundred and 
seventy-two; and Prince Edward, the heir to the throne, being away 
in the Holy Land, knew nothing of his father's death.  The Barons, 
however, proclaimed him King, immediately after the Royal funeral; 
and the people very willingly consented, since most men knew too 
well by this time what the horrors of a contest for the crown were.  
So King Edward the First, called, in a not very complimentary 
manner, LONGSHANKS, because of the slenderness of his legs, was 
peacefully accepted by the English Nation.

His legs had need to be strong, however long and thin they were; 
for they had to support him through many difficulties on the fiery 
sands of Asia, where his small force of soldiers fainted, died, 
deserted, and seemed to melt away.  But his prowess made light of 
it, and he said, 'I will go on, if I go on with no other follower 
than my groom!'

A Prince of this spirit gave the Turks a deal of trouble.  He 
stormed Nazareth, at which place, of all places on earth, I am 
sorry to relate, he made a frightful slaughter of innocent people; 
and then he went to Acre, where he got a truce of ten years from 
the Sultan.  He had very nearly lost his life in Acre, through the 
treachery of a Saracen Noble, called the Emir of Jaffa, who, making 
the pretence that he had some idea of turning Christian and wanted 
to know all about that religion, sent a trusty messenger to Edward 
very often - with a dagger in his sleeve.  At last, one Friday in 
Whitsun week, when it was very hot, and all the sandy prospect lay 
beneath the blazing sun, burnt up like a great overdone biscuit, 
and Edward was lying on a couch, dressed for coolness in only a 
loose robe, the messenger, with his chocolate-coloured face and his 
bright dark eyes and white teeth, came creeping in with a letter, 
and kneeled down like a tame tiger.  But, the moment Edward 
stretched out his hand to take the letter, the tiger made a spring 
at his heart.  He was quick, but Edward was quick too.  He seized 
the traitor by his chocolate throat, threw him to the ground, and 
slew him with the very dagger he had drawn.  The weapon had struck 
Edward in the arm, and although the wound itself was slight, it 
threatened to be mortal, for the blade of the dagger had been 
smeared with poison.  Thanks, however, to a better surgeon than was 
often to be found in those times, and to some wholesome herbs, and 
above all, to his faithful wife, ELEANOR, who devotedly nursed him, 
and is said by some to have sucked the poison from the wound with 
her own red lips (which I am very willing to believe), Edward soon 
recovered and was sound again.

As the King his father had sent entreaties to him to return home, 
he now began the journey.  He had got as far as Italy, when he met 
messengers who brought him intelligence of the King's death.  
Hearing that all was quiet at home, he made no haste to return to 
his own dominions, but paid a visit to the Pope, and went in state 
through various Italian Towns, where he was welcomed with 
acclamations as a mighty champion of the Cross from the Holy Land, 
and where he received presents of purple mantles and prancing 
horses, and went along in great triumph.  The shouting people 
little knew that he was the last English monarch who would ever 
embark in a crusade, or that within twenty years every conquest 
which the Christians had made in the Holy Land at the cost of so 
much blood, would be won back by the Turks.  But all this came to 
pass.

There was, and there is, an old town standing in a plain in France, 
called Chlons.  When the King was coming towards this place on his 
way to England, a wily French Lord, called the Count of Chlons, 
sent him a polite challenge to come with his knights and hold a 
fair tournament with the Count and HIS knights, and make a day of 
it with sword and lance.  It was represented to the King that the 
Count of Chlons was not to be trusted, and that, instead of a 
holiday fight for mere show and in good humour, he secretly meant a 
real battle, in which the English should be defeated by superior 
force.

The King, however, nothing afraid, went to the appointed place on 
the appointed day with a thousand followers.  When the Count came 
with two thousand and attacked the English in earnest, the English 
rushed at them with such valour that the Count's men and the 
Count's horses soon began to be tumbled down all over the field.  
The Count himself seized the King round the neck, but the King 
tumbled HIM out of his saddle in return for the compliment, and, 
jumping from his own horse, and standing over him, beat away at his 
iron armour like a blacksmith hammering on his anvil.  Even when 
the Count owned himself defeated and offered his sword, the King 
would not do him the honour to take it, but made him yield it up to 
a common soldier.  There had been such fury shown in this fight, 
that it was afterwards called the little Battle of Chlons.

The English were very well disposed to be proud of their King after 
these adventures; so, when he landed at Dover in the year one 
thousand two hundred and seventy-four (being then thirty-six years 
old), and went on to Westminster where he and his good Queen were 
crowned with great magnificence, splendid rejoicings took place.  
For the coronation-feast there were provided, among other eatables, 
four hundred oxen, four hundred sheep, four hundred and fifty pigs, 
eighteen wild boars, three hundred flitches of bacon, and twenty 
thousand fowls.  The fountains and conduits in the street flowed 
with red and white wine instead of water; the rich citizens hung 
silks and cloths of the brightest colours out of their windows to 
increase the beauty of the show, and threw out gold and silver by 
whole handfuls to make scrambles for the crowd.  In short, there 
was such eating and drinking, such music and capering, such a 
ringing of bells and tossing of caps, such a shouting, and singing, 
and revelling, as the narrow overhanging streets of old London City 
had not witnessed for many a long day.  All the people were merry 
except the poor Jews, who, trembling within their houses, and 
scarcely daring to peep out, began to foresee that they would have 
to find the money for this joviality sooner or later.

To dismiss this sad subject of the Jews for the present, I am sorry 
to add that in this reign they were most unmercifully pillaged.  
They were hanged in great numbers, on accusations of having clipped 
the King's coin - which all kinds of people had done.  They were 
heavily taxed; they were disgracefully badged; they were, on one 
day, thirteen years after the coronation, taken up with their wives 
and children and thrown into beastly prisons, until they purchased 
their release by paying to the King twelve thousand pounds.  
Finally, every kind of property belonging to them was seized by the 
King, except so little as would defray the charge of their taking 
themselves away into foreign countries.  Many years elapsed before 
the hope of gain induced any of their race to return to England, 
where they had been treated so heartlessly and had suffered so 
much.

If King Edward the First had been as bad a king to Christians as he 
was to Jews, he would have been bad indeed.  But he was, in 
general, a wise and great monarch, under whom the country much 
improved.  He had no love for the Great Charter - few Kings had, 
through many, many years - but he had high qualities.  The first 
bold object which he conceived when he came home, was, to unite 
under one Sovereign England, Scotland, and Wales; the two last of 
which countries had each a little king of its own, about whom the 
people were always quarrelling and fighting, and making a 
prodigious disturbance - a great deal more than he was worth.  In 
the course of King Edward's reign he was engaged, besides, in a war 
with France.  To make these quarrels clearer, we will separate 
their histories and take them thus.  Wales, first.  France, second.  
Scotland, third.


LLEWELLYN was the Prince of Wales.  He had been on the side of the 
Barons in the reign of the stupid old King, but had afterwards 
sworn allegiance to him.  When King Edward came to the throne, 
Llewellyn was required to swear allegiance to him also; which he 
refused to do.  The King, being crowned and in his own dominions, 
three times more required Llewellyn to come and do homage; and 
three times more Llewellyn said he would rather not.  He was going 
to be married to ELEANOR DE MONTFORT, a young lady of the family 
mentioned in the last reign; and it chanced that this young lady, 
coming from France with her youngest brother, EMERIC, was taken by 
an English ship, and was ordered by the English King to be 
detained.  Upon this, the quarrel came to a head.  The King went, 
with his fleet, to the coast of Wales, where, so encompassing 
Llewellyn, that he could only take refuge in the bleak mountain 
region of Snowdon in which no provisions could reach him, he was 
soon starved into an apology, and into a treaty of peace, and into 
paying the expenses of the war.  The King, however, forgave him 
some of the hardest conditions of the treaty, and consented to his 
marriage.  And he now thought he had reduced Wales to obedience.

But the Welsh, although they were naturally a gentle, quiet, 
pleasant people, who liked to receive strangers in their cottages 
among the mountains, and to set before them with free hospitality 
whatever they had to eat and drink, and to play to them on their 
harps, and sing their native ballads to them, were a people of 
great spirit when their blood was up.  Englishmen, after this 
affair, began to be insolent in Wales, and to assume the air of 
masters; and the Welsh pride could not bear it.  Moreover, they 
believed in that unlucky old Merlin, some of whose unlucky old 
prophecies somebody always seemed doomed to remember when there was 
a chance of its doing harm; and just at this time some blind old 
gentleman with a harp and a long white beard, who was an excellent 
person, but had become of an unknown age and tedious, burst out 
with a declaration that Merlin had predicted that when English 
money had become round, a Prince of Wales would be crowned in 
London.  Now, King Edward had recently forbidden the English penny 
to be cut into halves and quarters for halfpence and farthings, and 
had actually introduced a round coin; therefore, the Welsh people 
said this was the time Merlin meant, and rose accordingly.

King Edward had bought over PRINCE DAVID, Llewellyn's brother, by 
heaping favours upon him; but he was the first to revolt, being 
perhaps troubled in his conscience.  One stormy night, he surprised 
the Castle of Hawarden, in possession of which an English nobleman 
had been left; killed the whole garrison, and carried off the 
nobleman a prisoner to Snowdon.  Upon this, the Welsh people rose 
like one man.  King Edward, with his army, marching from Worcester 
to the Menai Strait, crossed it - near to where the wonderful 
tubular iron bridge now, in days so different, makes a passage for 
railway trains - by a bridge of boats that enabled forty men to 
march abreast.  He subdued the Island of Anglesea, and sent his men 
forward to observe the enemy.  The sudden appearance of the Welsh 
created a panic among them, and they fell back to the bridge.  The 
tide had in the meantime risen and separated the boats; the Welsh 
pursuing them, they were driven into the sea, and there they sunk, 
in their heavy iron armour, by thousands.  After this victory 
Llewellyn, helped by the severe winter-weather of Wales, gained 
another battle; but the King ordering a portion of his English army 
to advance through South Wales, and catch him between two foes, and 
Llewellyn bravely turning to meet this new enemy, he was surprised 
and killed - very meanly, for he was unarmed and defenceless.  His 
head was struck off and sent to London, where it was fixed upon the 
Tower, encircled with a wreath, some say of ivy, some say of 
willow, some say of silver, to make it look like a ghastly coin in 
ridicule of the prediction.

David, however, still held out for six months, though eagerly 
sought after by the King, and hunted by his own countrymen.  One of 
them finally betrayed him with his wife and children.  He was 
sentenced to be hanged, drawn, and quartered; and from that time 
this became the established punishment of Traitors in England - a 
punishment wholly without excuse, as being revolting, vile, and 
cruel, after its object is dead; and which has no sense in it, as 
its only real degradation (and that nothing can blot out) is to the 
country that permits on any consideration such abominable 
barbarity.

Wales was now subdued.  The Queen giving birth to a young prince in 
the Castle of Carnarvon, the King showed him to the Welsh people as 
their countryman, and called him Prince of Wales; a title that has 
ever since been borne by the heir-apparent to the English throne - 
which that little Prince soon became, by the death of his elder 
brother.  The King did better things for the Welsh than that, by 
improving their laws and encouraging their trade.  Disturbances 
still took place, chiefly occasioned by the avarice and pride of 
the English Lords, on whom Welsh lands and castles had been 
bestowed; but they were subdued, and the country never rose again.  
There is a legend that to prevent the people from being incited to 
rebellion by the songs of their bards and harpers, Edward had them 
all put to death.  Some of them may have fallen among other men who 
held out against the King; but this general slaughter is, I think, 
a fancy of the harpers themselves, who, I dare say, made a song 
about it many years afterwards, and sang it by the Welsh firesides 
until it came to be believed.

The foreign war of the reign of Edward the First arose in this way.  
The crews of two vessels, one a Norman ship, and the other an 
English ship, happened to go to the same place in their boats to 
fill their casks with fresh water.  Being rough angry fellows, they 
began to quarrel, and then to fight - the English with their fists; 
the Normans with their knives - and, in the fight, a Norman was 
killed.  The Norman crew, instead of revenging themselves upon 
those English sailors with whom they had quarrelled (who were too 
strong for them, I suspect), took to their ship again in a great 
rage, attacked the first English ship they met, laid hold of an 
unoffending merchant who happened to be on board, and brutally 
hanged him in the rigging of their own vessel with a dog at his 
feet.  This so enraged the English sailors that there was no 
restraining them; and whenever, and wherever, English sailors met 
Norman sailors, they fell upon each other tooth and nail.  The 
Irish and Dutch sailors took part with the English; the French and 
Genoese sailors helped the Normans; and thus the greater part of 
the mariners sailing over the sea became, in their way, as violent 
and raging as the sea itself when it is disturbed.

King Edward's fame had been so high abroad that he had been chosen 
to decide a difference between France and another foreign power, 
and had lived upon the Continent three years.  At first, neither he 
nor the French King PHILIP (the good Louis had been dead some time) 
interfered in these quarrels; but when a fleet of eighty English 
ships engaged and utterly defeated a Norman fleet of two hundred, 
in a pitched battle fought round a ship at anchor, in which no 
quarter was given, the matter became too serious to be passed over.  
King Edward, as Duke of Guienne, was summoned to present himself 
before the King of France, at Paris, and answer for the damage done 
by his sailor subjects.  At first, he sent the Bishop of London as 
his representative, and then his brother EDMUND, who was married to 
the French Queen's mother.  I am afraid Edmund was an easy man, and 
allowed himself to be talked over by his charming relations, the 
French court ladies; at all events, he was induced to give up his 
brother's dukedom for forty days - as a mere form, the French King 
said, to satisfy his honour - and he was so very much astonished, 
when the time was out, to find that the French King had no idea of 
giving it up again, that I should not wonder if it hastened his 
death:  which soon took place.

King Edward was a King to win his foreign dukedom back again, if it 
could be won by energy and valour.  He raised a large army, 
renounced his allegiance as Duke of Guienne, and crossed the sea to 
carry war into France.  Before any important battle was fought, 
however, a truce was agreed upon for two years; and in the course 
of that time, the Pope effected a reconciliation.  King Edward, who 
was now a widower, having lost his affectionate and good wife, 
Eleanor, married the French King's sister, MARGARET; and the Prince 
of Wales was contracted to the French King's daughter ISABELLA.

Out of bad things, good things sometimes arise.  Out of this 
hanging of the innocent merchant, and the bloodshed and strife it 
caused, there came to be established one of the greatest powers 
that the English people now possess.  The preparations for the war 
being very expensive, and King Edward greatly wanting money, and 
being very arbitrary in his ways of raising it, some of the Barons 
began firmly to oppose him.  Two of them, in particular, HUMPHREY 
BOHUN, Earl of Hereford, and ROGER BIGOD, Earl of Norfolk, were so 
stout against him, that they maintained he had no right to command 
them to head his forces in Guienne, and flatly refused to go there.  
'By Heaven, Sir Earl,' said the King to the Earl of Hereford, in a 
great passion, 'you shall either go or be hanged!'  'By Heaven, Sir 
King,' replied the Earl, 'I will neither go nor yet will I be 
hanged!' and both he and the other Earl sturdily left the court, 
attended by many Lords.  The King tried every means of raising 
money.  He taxed the clergy, in spite of all the Pope said to the 
contrary; and when they refused to pay, reduced them to submission, 
by saying Very well, then they had no claim upon the government for 
protection, and any man might plunder them who would - which a good 
many men were very ready to do, and very readily did, and which the 
clergy found too losing a game to be played at long.  He seized all 
the wool and leather in the hands of the merchants, promising to 
pay for it some fine day; and he set a tax upon the exportation of 
wool, which was so unpopular among the traders that it was called 
'The evil toll.'  But all would not do.  The Barons, led by those 
two great Earls, declared any taxes imposed without the consent of 
Parliament, unlawful; and the Parliament refused to impose taxes, 
until the King should confirm afresh the two Great Charters, and 
should solemnly declare in writing, that there was no power in the 
country to raise money from the people, evermore, but the power of 
Parliament representing all ranks of the people.  The King was very 
unwilling to diminish his own power by allowing this great 
privilege in the Parliament; but there was no help for it, and he 
at last complied.  We shall come to another King by-and-by, who 
might have saved his head from rolling off, if he had profited by 
this example.

The people gained other benefits in Parliament from the good sense 
and wisdom of this King.  Many of the laws were much improved; 
provision was made for the greater safety of travellers, and the 
apprehension of thieves and murderers; the priests were prevented 
from holding too much land, and so becoming too powerful; and 
Justices of the Peace were first appointed (though not at first 
under that name) in various parts of the country.


And now we come to Scotland, which was the great and lasting 
trouble of the reign of King Edward the First.

About thirteen years after King Edward's coronation, Alexander the 
Third, the King of Scotland, died of a fall from his horse.  He had 
been married to Margaret, King Edward's sister.  All their children 
being dead, the Scottish crown became the right of a young Princess 
only eight years old, the daughter of ERIC, King of Norway, who had 
married a daughter of the deceased sovereign.  King Edward 
proposed, that the Maiden of Norway, as this Princess was called, 
should be engaged to be married to his eldest son; but, 
unfortunately, as she was coming over to England she fell sick, and 
landing on one of the Orkney Islands, died there.  A great 
commotion immediately began in Scotland, where as many as thirteen 
noisy claimants to the vacant throne started up and made a general 
confusion.

King Edward being much renowned for his sagacity and justice, it 
seems to have been agreed to refer the dispute to him.  He accepted 
the trust, and went, with an army, to the Border-land where England 
and Scotland joined.  There, he called upon the Scottish gentlemen 
to meet him at the Castle of Norham, on the English side of the 
river Tweed; and to that Castle they came.  But, before he would 
take any step in the business, he required those Scottish 
gentlemen, one and all, to do homage to him as their superior Lord; 
and when they hesitated, he said, 'By holy Edward, whose crown I 
wear, I will have my rights, or I will die in maintaining them!'  
The Scottish gentlemen, who had not expected this, were 
disconcerted, and asked for three weeks to think about it.

At the end of the three weeks, another meeting took place, on a 
green plain on the Scottish side of the river.  Of all the 
competitors for the Scottish throne, there were only two who had 
any real claim, in right of their near kindred to the Royal Family.  
These were JOHN BALIOL and ROBERT BRUCE:  and the right was, I have 
no doubt, on the side of John Baliol.  At this particular meeting 
John Baliol was not present, but Robert Bruce was; and on Robert 
Bruce being formally asked whether he acknowledged the King of 
England for his superior lord, he answered, plainly and distinctly, 
Yes, he did.  Next day, John Baliol appeared, and said the same.  
This point settled, some arrangements were made for inquiring into 
their titles.

The inquiry occupied a pretty long time - more than a year.  While 
it was going on, King Edward took the opportunity of making a 
journey through Scotland, and calling upon the Scottish people of 
all degrees to acknowledge themselves his vassals, or be imprisoned 
until they did.  In the meanwhile, Commissioners were appointed to 
conduct the inquiry, a Parliament was held at Berwick about it, the 
two claimants were heard at full length, and there was a vast 
amount of talking.  At last, in the great hall of the Castle of 
Berwick, the King gave judgment in favour of John Baliol:  who, 
consenting to receive his crown by the King of England's favour and 
permission, was crowned at Scone, in an old stone chair which had 
been used for ages in the abbey there, at the coronations of 
Scottish Kings.  Then, King Edward caused the great seal of 
Scotland, used since the late King's death, to be broken in four 
pieces, and placed in the English Treasury; and considered that he 
now had Scotland (according to the common saying) under his thumb.

Scotland had a strong will of its own yet, however.  King Edward, 
determined that the Scottish King should not forget he was his 
vassal, summoned him repeatedly to come and defend himself and his 
judges before the English Parliament when appeals from the 
decisions of Scottish courts of justice were being heard.  At 
length, John Baliol, who had no great heart of his own, had so much 
heart put into him by the brave spirit of the Scottish people, who 
took this as a national insult, that he refused to come any more.  
Thereupon, the King further required him to help him in his war 
abroad (which was then in progress), and to give up, as security 
for his good behaviour in future, the three strong Scottish Castles 
of Jedburgh, Roxburgh, and Berwick.  Nothing of this being done; on 
the contrary, the Scottish people concealing their King among their 
mountains in the Highlands and showing a determination to resist; 
Edward marched to Berwick with an army of thirty thousand foot, and 
four thousand horse; took the Castle, and slew its whole garrison, 
and the inhabitants of the town as well - men, women, and children.  
LORD WARRENNE, Earl of Surrey, then went on to the Castle of 
Dunbar, before which a battle was fought, and the whole Scottish 
army defeated with great slaughter.  The victory being complete, 
the Earl of Surrey was left as guardian of Scotland; the principal 
offices in that kingdom were given to Englishmen; the more powerful 
Scottish Nobles were obliged to come and live in England; the 
Scottish crown and sceptre were brought away; and even the old 
stone chair was carried off and placed in Westminster Abbey, where 
you may see it now.  Baliol had the Tower of London lent him for a 
residence, with permission to range about within a circle of twenty 
miles.  Three years afterwards he was allowed to go to Normandy, 
where he had estates, and where he passed the remaining six years 
of his life:  far more happily, I dare say, than he had lived for a 
long while in angry Scotland.

Now, there was, in the West of Scotland, a gentleman of small 
fortune, named WILLIAM WALLACE, the second son of a Scottish 
knight.  He was a man of great size and great strength; he was very 
brave and daring; when he spoke to a body of his countrymen, he 
could rouse them in a wonderful manner by the power of his burning 
words; he loved Scotland dearly, and he hated England with his 
utmost might.  The domineering conduct of the English who now held 
the places of trust in Scotland made them as intolerable to the 
proud Scottish people as they had been, under similar 
circumstances, to the Welsh; and no man in all Scotland regarded 
them with so much smothered rage as William Wallace.  One day, an 
Englishman in office, little knowing what he was, affronted HIM.  
Wallace instantly struck him dead, and taking refuge among the 
rocks and hills, and there joining with his countryman, SIR WILLIAM 
DOUGLAS, who was also in arms against King Edward, became the most 
resolute and undaunted champion of a people struggling for their 
independence that ever lived upon the earth.

The English Guardian of the Kingdom fled before him, and, thus 
encouraged, the Scottish people revolted everywhere, and fell upon 
the English without mercy.  The Earl of Surrey, by the King's 
commands, raised all the power of the Border-counties, and two 
English armies poured into Scotland.  Only one Chief, in the face 
of those armies, stood by Wallace, who, with a force of forty 
thousand men, awaited the invaders at a place on the river Forth, 
within two miles of Stirling.  Across the river there was only one 
poor wooden bridge, called the bridge of Kildean - so narrow, that 
but two men could cross it abreast.  With his eyes upon this 
bridge, Wallace posted the greater part of his men among some 
rising grounds, and waited calmly.  When the English army came up 
on the opposite bank of the river, messengers were sent forward to 
offer terms.  Wallace sent them back with a defiance, in the name 
of the freedom of Scotland.  Some of the officers of the Earl of 
Surrey in command of the English, with THEIR eyes also on the 
bridge, advised him to be discreet and not hasty.  He, however, 
urged to immediate battle by some other officers, and particularly 
by CRESSINGHAM, King Edward's treasurer, and a rash man, gave the 
word of command to advance.  One thousand English crossed the 
bridge, two abreast; the Scottish troops were as motionless as 
stone images.  Two thousand English crossed; three thousand, four 
thousand, five.  Not a feather, all this time, had been seen to 
stir among the Scottish bonnets.  Now, they all fluttered.  
'Forward, one party, to the foot of the Bridge!' cried Wallace, 
'and let no more English cross!  The rest, down with me on the five 
thousand who have come over, and cut them all to pieces!'  It was 
done, in the sight of the whole remainder of the English army, who 
could give no help.  Cressingham himself was killed, and the Scotch 
made whips for their horses of his skin.

King Edward was abroad at this time, and during the successes on 
the Scottish side which followed, and which enabled bold Wallace to 
win the whole country back again, and even to ravage the English 
borders.  But, after a few winter months, the King returned, and 
took the field with more than his usual energy.  One night, when a 
kick from his horse as they both lay on the ground together broke 
two of his ribs, and a cry arose that he was killed, he leaped into 
his saddle, regardless of the pain he suffered, and rode through 
the camp.  Day then appearing, he gave the word (still, of course, 
in that bruised and aching state) Forward! and led his army on to 
near Falkirk, where the Scottish forces were seen drawn up on some 
stony ground, behind a morass.  Here, he defeated Wallace, and 
killed fifteen thousand of his men.  With the shattered remainder, 
Wallace drew back to Stirling; but, being pursued, set fire to the 
town that it might give no help to the English, and escaped.  The 
inhabitants of Perth afterwards set fire to their houses for the 
same reason, and the King, unable to find provisions, was forced to 
withdraw his army.

Another ROBERT BRUCE, the grandson of him who had disputed the 
Scottish crown with Baliol, was now in arms against the King (that 
elder Bruce being dead), and also JOHN COMYN, Baliol's nephew.  
These two young men might agree in opposing Edward, but could agree 
in nothing else, as they were rivals for the throne of Scotland.  
Probably it was because they knew this, and knew what troubles must 
arise even if they could hope to get the better of the great 
English King, that the principal Scottish people applied to the 
Pope for his interference.  The Pope, on the principle of losing 
nothing for want of trying to get it, very coolly claimed that 
Scotland belonged to him; but this was a little too much, and the 
Parliament in a friendly manner told him so.

In the spring time of the year one thousand three hundred and 
three, the King sent SIR JOHN SEGRAVE, whom he made Governor of 
Scotland, with twenty thousand men, to reduce the rebels.  Sir John 
was not as careful as he should have been, but encamped at Rosslyn, 
near Edinburgh, with his army divided into three parts.  The 
Scottish forces saw their advantage; fell on each part separately; 
defeated each; and killed all the prisoners.  Then, came the King 
himself once more, as soon as a great army could be raised; he 
passed through the whole north of Scotland, laying waste whatsoever 
came in his way; and he took up his winter quarters at Dunfermline.  
The Scottish cause now looked so hopeless, that Comyn and the other 
nobles made submission and received their pardons.  Wallace alone 
stood out.  He was invited to surrender, though on no distinct 
pledge that his life should be spared; but he still defied the 
ireful King, and lived among the steep crags of the Highland glens, 
where the eagles made their nests, and where the mountain torrents 
roared, and the white snow was deep, and the bitter winds blew 
round his unsheltered head, as he lay through many a pitch-dark 
night wrapped up in his plaid.  Nothing could break his spirit; 
nothing could lower his courage; nothing could induce him to forget 
or to forgive his country's wrongs.  Even when the Castle of 
Stirling, which had long held out, was besieged by the King with 
every kind of military engine then in use; even when the lead upon 
cathedral roofs was taken down to help to make them; even when the 
King, though an old man, commanded in the siege as if he were a 
youth, being so resolved to conquer; even when the brave garrison 
(then found with amazement to be not two hundred people, including 
several ladies) were starved and beaten out and were made to submit 
on their knees, and with every form of disgrace that could 
aggravate their sufferings; even then, when there was not a ray of 
hope in Scotland, William Wallace was as proud and firm as if he 
had beheld the powerful and relentless Edward lying dead at his 
feet.

Who betrayed William Wallace in the end, is not quite certain.  
That he was betrayed - probably by an attendant - is too true.  He 
was taken to the Castle of Dumbarton, under SIR JOHN MENTEITH, and 
thence to London, where the great fame of his bravery and 
resolution attracted immense concourses of people to behold him.  
He was tried in Westminster Hall, with a crown of laurel on his 
head - it is supposed because he was reported to have said that he 
ought to wear, or that he would wear, a crown there and was found 
guilty as a robber, a murderer, and a traitor.  What they called a 
robber (he said to those who tried him) he was, because he had 
taken spoil from the King's men.  What they called a murderer, he 
was, because he had slain an insolent Englishman.  What they called 
a traitor, he was not, for he had never sworn allegiance to the 
King, and had ever scorned to do it.  He was dragged at the tails 
of horses to West Smithfield, and there hanged on a high gallows, 
torn open before he was dead, beheaded, and quartered.  His head 
was set upon a pole on London Bridge, his right arm was sent to 
Newcastle, his left arm to Berwick, his legs to Perth and Aberdeen.  
But, if King Edward had had his body cut into inches, and had sent 
every separate inch into a separate town, he could not have 
dispersed it half so far and wide as his fame.  Wallace will be 
remembered in songs and stories, while there are songs and stories 
in the English tongue, and Scotland will hold him dear while her 
lakes and mountains last.

Released from this dreaded enemy, the King made a fairer plan of 
Government for Scotland, divided the offices of honour among 
Scottish gentlemen and English gentlemen, forgave past offences, 
and thought, in his old age, that his work was done.

But he deceived himself.  Comyn and Bruce conspired, and made an 
appointment to meet at Dumfries, in the church of the Minorites.  
There is a story that Comyn was false to Bruce, and had informed 
against him to the King; that Bruce was warned of his danger and 
the necessity of flight, by receiving, one night as he sat at 
supper, from his friend the Earl of Gloucester, twelve pennies and 
a pair of spurs; that as he was riding angrily to keep his 
appointment (through a snow-storm, with his horse's shoes reversed 
that he might not be tracked), he met an evil-looking serving man, 
a messenger of Comyn, whom he killed, and concealed in whose dress 
he found letters that proved Comyn's treachery.  However this may 
be, they were likely enough to quarrel in any case, being hot-
headed rivals; and, whatever they quarrelled about, they certainly 
did quarrel in the church where they met, and Bruce drew his dagger 
and stabbed Comyn, who fell upon the pavement.  When Bruce came 
out, pale and disturbed, the friends who were waiting for him asked 
what was the matter?  'I think I have killed Comyn,' said he.  'You 
only think so?' returned one of them; 'I will make sure!' and going 
into the church, and finding him alive, stabbed him again and 
again.  Knowing that the King would never forgive this new deed of 
violence, the party then declared Bruce King of Scotland:  got him 
crowned at Scone - without the chair; and set up the rebellious 
standard once again.

When the King heard of it he kindled with fiercer anger than he had 
ever shown yet.  He caused the Prince of Wales and two hundred and 
seventy of the young nobility to be knighted - the trees in the 
Temple Gardens were cut down to make room for their tents, and they 
watched their armour all night, according to the old usage:  some 
in the Temple Church:  some in Westminster Abbey - and at the 
public Feast which then took place, he swore, by Heaven, and by two 
swans covered with gold network which his minstrels placed upon the 
table, that he would avenge the death of Comyn, and would punish 
the false Bruce.  And before all the company, he charged the Prince 
his son, in case that he should die before accomplishing his vow, 
not to bury him until it was fulfilled.  Next morning the Prince 
and the rest of the young Knights rode away to the Border-country 
to join the English army; and the King, now weak and sick, followed 
in a horse-litter.

Bruce, after losing a battle and undergoing many dangers and much 
misery, fled to Ireland, where he lay concealed through the winter.  
That winter, Edward passed in hunting down and executing Bruce's 
relations and adherents, sparing neither youth nor age, and showing 
no touch of pity or sign of mercy.  In the following spring, Bruce 
reappeared and gained some victories.  In these frays, both sides 
were grievously cruel.  For instance - Bruce's two brothers, being 
taken captives desperately wounded, were ordered by the King to 
instant execution.  Bruce's friend Sir John Douglas, taking his own 
Castle of Douglas out of the hands of an English Lord, roasted the 
dead bodies of the slaughtered garrison in a great fire made of 
every movable within it; which dreadful cookery his men called the 
Douglas Larder.  Bruce, still successful, however, drove the Earl 
of Pembroke and the Earl of Gloucester into the Castle of Ayr and 
laid siege to it.

The King, who had been laid up all the winter, but had directed the 
army from his sick-bed, now advanced to Carlisle, and there, 
causing the litter in which he had travelled to be placed in the 
Cathedral as an offering to Heaven, mounted his horse once more, 
and for the last time.  He was now sixty-nine years old, and had 
reigned thirty-five years.  He was so ill, that in four days he 
could go no more than six miles; still, even at that pace, he went 
on and resolutely kept his face towards the Border.  At length, he 
lay down at the village of Burgh-upon-Sands; and there, telling 
those around him to impress upon the Prince that he was to remember 
his father's vow, and was never to rest until he had thoroughly 
subdued Scotland, he yielded up his last breath.



CHAPTER XVII - ENGLAND UNDER EDWARD THE SECOND



KING Edward the Second, the first Prince of Wales, was twenty-three 
years old when his father died.  There was a certain favourite of 
his, a young man from Gascony, named PIERS GAVESTON, of whom his 
father had so much disapproved that he had ordered him out of 
England, and had made his son swear by the side of his sick-bed, 
never to bring him back.  But, the Prince no sooner found himself 
King, than he broke his oath, as so many other Princes and Kings 
did (they were far too ready to take oaths), and sent for his dear 
friend immediately.

Now, this same Gaveston was handsome enough, but was a reckless, 
insolent, audacious fellow.  He was detested by the proud English 
Lords:  not only because he had such power over the King, and made 
the Court such a dissipated place, but, also, because he could ride 
better than they at tournaments, and was used, in his impudence, to 
cut very bad jokes on them; calling one, the old hog; another, the 
stage-player; another, the Jew; another, the black dog of Ardenne.  
This was as poor wit as need be, but it made those Lords very 
wroth; and the surly Earl of Warwick, who was the black dog, swore 
that the time should come when Piers Gaveston should feel the black 
dog's teeth.

It was not come yet, however, nor did it seem to be coming.  The 
King made him Earl of Cornwall, and gave him vast riches; and, when 
the King went over to France to marry the French Princess, 
ISABELLA, daughter of PHILIP LE BEL:  who was said to be the most 
beautiful woman in the world:  he made Gaveston, Regent of the 
Kingdom.  His splendid marriage-ceremony in the Church of Our Lady 
at Boulogne, where there were four Kings and three Queens present 
(quite a pack of Court Cards, for I dare say the Knaves were not 
wanting), being over, he seemed to care little or nothing for his 
beautiful wife; but was wild with impatience to meet Gaveston 
again.

When he landed at home, he paid no attention to anybody else, but 
ran into the favourite's arms before a great concourse of people, 
and hugged him, and kissed him, and called him his brother.  At the 
coronation which soon followed, Gaveston was the richest and 
brightest of all the glittering company there, and had the honour 
of carrying the crown.  This made the proud Lords fiercer than 
ever; the people, too, despised the favourite, and would never call 
him Earl of Cornwall, however much he complained to the King and 
asked him to punish them for not doing so, but persisted in styling 
him plain Piers Gaveston.

The Barons were so unceremonious with the King in giving him to 
understand that they would not bear this favourite, that the King 
was obliged to send him out of the country.  The favourite himself 
was made to take an oath (more oaths!) that he would never come 
back, and the Barons supposed him to be banished in disgrace, until 
they heard that he was appointed Governor of Ireland.  Even this 
was not enough for the besotted King, who brought him home again in 
a year's time, and not only disgusted the Court and the people by 
his doting folly, but offended his beautiful wife too, who never 
liked him afterwards.

He had now the old Royal want - of money - and the Barons had the 
new power of positively refusing to let him raise any.  He summoned 
a Parliament at York; the Barons refused to make one, while the 
favourite was near him.  He summoned another Parliament at 
Westminster, and sent Gaveston away.  Then, the Barons came, 
completely armed, and appointed a committee of themselves to 
correct abuses in the state and in the King's household.  He got 
some money on these conditions, and directly set off with Gaveston 
to the Border-country, where they spent it in idling away the time, 
and feasting, while Bruce made ready to drive the English out of 
Scotland.  For, though the old King had even made this poor weak 
son of his swear (as some say) that he would not bury his bones, 
but would have them boiled clean in a caldron, and carried before 
the English army until Scotland was entirely subdued, the second 
Edward was so unlike the first that Bruce gained strength and power 
every day.

The committee of Nobles, after some months of deliberation, 
ordained that the King should henceforth call a Parliament 
together, once every year, and even twice if necessary, instead of 
summoning it only when he chose.  Further, that Gaveston should 
once more be banished, and, this time, on pain of death if he ever 
came back.  The King's tears were of no avail; he was obliged to 
send his favourite to Flanders.  As soon as he had done so, 
however, he dissolved the Parliament, with the low cunning of a 
mere fool, and set off to the North of England, thinking to get an 
army about him to oppose the Nobles.  And once again he brought 
Gaveston home, and heaped upon him all the riches and titles of 
which the Barons had deprived him.

The Lords saw, now, that there was nothing for it but to put the 
favourite to death.  They could have done so, legally, according to 
the terms of his banishment; but they did so, I am sorry to say, in 
a shabby manner.  Led by the Earl of Lancaster, the King's cousin, 
they first of all attacked the King and Gaveston at Newcastle.  
They had time to escape by sea, and the mean King, having his 
precious Gaveston with him, was quite content to leave his lovely 
wife behind.  When they were comparatively safe, they separated; 
the King went to York to collect a force of soldiers; and the 
favourite shut himself up, in the meantime, in Scarborough Castle 
overlooking the sea.  This was what the Barons wanted.  They knew 
that the Castle could not hold out; they attacked it, and made 
Gaveston surrender.  He delivered himself up to the Earl of 
Pembroke - that Lord whom he had called the Jew - on the Earl's 
pledging his faith and knightly word, that no harm should happen to 
him and no violence be done him.

Now, it was agreed with Gaveston that he should be taken to the 
Castle of Wallingford, and there kept in honourable custody.  They 
travelled as far as Dedington, near Banbury, where, in the Castle 
of that place, they stopped for a night to rest.  Whether the Earl 
of Pembroke left his prisoner there, knowing what would happen, or 
really left him thinking no harm, and only going (as he pretended) 
to visit his wife, the Countess, who was in the neighbourhood, is 
no great matter now; in any case, he was bound as an honourable 
gentleman to protect his prisoner, and he did not do it.  In the 
morning, while the favourite was yet in bed, he was required to 
dress himself and come down into the court-yard.  He did so without 
any mistrust, but started and turned pale when he found it full of 
strange armed men.  'I think you know me?' said their leader, also 
armed from head to foot.  'I am the black dog of Ardenne!'  The 
time was come when Piers Gaveston was to feel the black dog's teeth 
indeed.  They set him on a mule, and carried him, in mock state and 
with military music, to the black dog's kennel - Warwick Castle - 
where a hasty council, composed of some great noblemen, considered 
what should be done with him.  Some were for sparing him, but one 
loud voice - it was the black dog's bark, I dare say - sounded 
through the Castle Hall, uttering these words:  'You have the fox 
in your power.  Let him go now, and you must hunt him again.'

They sentenced him to death.  He threw himself at the feet of the 
Earl of Lancaster - the old hog - but the old hog was as savage as 
the dog.  He was taken out upon the pleasant road, leading from 
Warwick to Coventry, where the beautiful river Avon, by which, long 
afterwards, WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE was born and now lies buried, 
sparkled in the bright landscape of the beautiful May-day; and 
there they struck off his wretched head, and stained the dust with 
his blood.

When the King heard of this black deed, in his grief and rage he 
denounced relentless war against his Barons, and both sides were in 
arms for half a year.  But, it then became necessary for them to 
join their forces against Bruce, who had used the time well while 
they were divided, and had now a great power in Scotland.

Intelligence was brought that Bruce was then besieging Stirling 
Castle, and that the Governor had been obliged to pledge himself to 
surrender it, unless he should be relieved before a certain day.  
Hereupon, the King ordered the nobles and their fighting-men to 
meet him at Berwick; but, the nobles cared so little for the King, 
and so neglected the summons, and lost time, that only on the day 
before that appointed for the surrender, did the King find himself 
at Stirling, and even then with a smaller force than he had 
expected.  However, he had, altogether, a hundred thousand men, and 
Bruce had not more than forty thousand; but, Bruce's army was 
strongly posted in three square columns, on the ground lying 
between the Burn or Brook of Bannock and the walls of Stirling 
Castle.

On the very evening, when the King came up, Bruce did a brave act 
that encouraged his men.  He was seen by a certain HENRY DE BOHUN, 
an English Knight, riding about before his army on a little horse, 
with a light battle-axe in his hand, and a crown of gold on his 
head.  This English Knight, who was mounted on a strong war-horse, 
cased in steel, strongly armed, and able (as he thought) to 
overthrow Bruce by crushing him with his mere weight, set spurs to 
his great charger, rode on him, and made a thrust at him with his 
heavy spear.  Bruce parried the thrust, and with one blow of his 
battle-axe split his skull.

The Scottish men did not forget this, next day when the battle 
raged.  RANDOLPH, Bruce's valiant Nephew, rode, with the small body 
of men he commanded, into such a host of the English, all shining 
in polished armour in the sunlight, that they seemed to be 
swallowed up and lost, as if they had plunged into the sea.  But, 
they fought so well, and did such dreadful execution, that the 
English staggered.  Then came Bruce himself upon them, with all the 
rest of his army.  While they were thus hard pressed and amazed, 
there appeared upon the hills what they supposed to be a new 
Scottish army, but what were really only the camp followers, in 
number fifteen thousand:  whom Bruce had taught to show themselves 
at that place and time.  The Earl of Gloucester, commanding the 
English horse, made a last rush to change the fortune of the day; 
but Bruce (like Jack the Giant-killer in the story) had had pits 
dug in the ground, and covered over with turfs and stakes.  Into 
these, as they gave way beneath the weight of the horses, riders 
and horses rolled by hundreds.  The English were completely routed; 
all their treasure, stores, and engines, were taken by the Scottish 
men; so many waggons and other wheeled vehicles were seized, that 
it is related that they would have reached, if they had been drawn 
out in a line, one hundred and eighty miles.  The fortunes of 
Scotland were, for the time, completely changed; and never was a 
battle won, more famous upon Scottish ground, than this great 
battle of BANNOCKBURN.

Plague and famine succeeded in England; and still the powerless 
King and his disdainful Lords were always in contention.  Some of 
the turbulent chiefs of Ireland made proposals to Bruce, to accept 
the rule of that country.  He sent his brother Edward to them, who 
was crowned King of Ireland.  He afterwards went himself to help 
his brother in his Irish wars, but his brother was defeated in the 
end and killed.  Robert Bruce, returning to Scotland, still 
increased his strength there.

As the King's ruin had begun in a favourite, so it seemed likely to 
end in one.  He was too poor a creature to rely at all upon 
himself; and his new favourite was one HUGH LE DESPENSER, the son 
of a gentleman of ancient family.  Hugh was handsome and brave, but 
he was the favourite of a weak King, whom no man cared a rush for, 
and that was a dangerous place to hold.  The Nobles leagued against 
him, because the King liked him; and they lay in wait, both for his 
ruin and his father's.  Now, the King had married him to the 
daughter of the late Earl of Gloucester, and had given both him and 
his father great possessions in Wales.  In their endeavours to 
extend these, they gave violent offence to an angry Welsh 
gentleman, named JOHN DE MOWBRAY, and to divers other angry Welsh 
gentlemen, who resorted to arms, took their castles, and seized 
their estates.  The Earl of Lancaster had first placed the 
favourite (who was a poor relation of his own) at Court, and he 
considered his own dignity offended by the preference he received 
and the honours he acquired; so he, and the Barons who were his 
friends, joined the Welshmen, marched on London, and sent a message 
to the King demanding to have the favourite and his father 
banished.  At first, the King unaccountably took it into his head 
to be spirited, and to send them a bold reply; but when they 
quartered themselves around Holborn and Clerkenwell, and went down, 
armed, to the Parliament at Westminster, he gave way, and complied 
with their demands.

His turn of triumph came sooner than he expected.  It arose out of 
an accidental circumstance.  The beautiful Queen happening to be 
travelling, came one night to one of the royal castles, and 
demanded to be lodged and entertained there until morning.  The 
governor of this castle, who was one of the enraged lords, was 
away, and in his absence, his wife refused admission to the Queen; 
a scuffle took place among the common men on either side, and some 
of the royal attendants were killed.  The people, who cared nothing 
for the King, were very angry that their beautiful Queen should be 
thus rudely treated in her own dominions; and the King, taking 
advantage of this feeling, besieged the castle, took it, and then 
called the two Despensers home.  Upon this, the confederate lords 
and the Welshmen went over to Bruce.  The King encountered them at 
Boroughbridge, gained the victory, and took a number of 
distinguished prisoners; among them, the Earl of Lancaster, now an 
old man, upon whose destruction he was resolved.  This Earl was 
taken to his own castle of Pontefract, and there tried and found 
guilty by an unfair court appointed for the purpose; he was not 
even allowed to speak in his own defence.  He was insulted, pelted, 
mounted on a starved pony without saddle or bridle, carried out, 
and beheaded.  Eight-and-twenty knights were hanged, drawn, and 
quartered.  When the King had despatched this bloody work, and had 
made a fresh and a long truce with Bruce, he took the Despensers 
into greater favour than ever, and made the father Earl of 
Winchester.

One prisoner, and an important one, who was taken at Boroughbridge, 
made his escape, however, and turned the tide against the King.  
This was ROGER MORTIMER, always resolutely opposed to him, who was 
sentenced to death, and placed for safe custody in the Tower of 
London.  He treated his guards to a quantity of wine into which he 
had put a sleeping potion; and, when they were insensible, broke 
out of his dungeon, got into a kitchen, climbed up the chimney, let 
himself down from the roof of the building with a rope-ladder, 
passed the sentries, got down to the river, and made away in a boat 
to where servants and horses were waiting for him.  He finally 
escaped to France, where CHARLES LE BEL, the brother of the 
beautiful Queen, was King.  Charles sought to quarrel with the King 
of England, on pretence of his not having come to do him homage at 
his coronation.  It was proposed that the beautiful Queen should go 
over to arrange the dispute; she went, and wrote home to the King, 
that as he was sick and could not come to France himself, perhaps 
it would be better to send over the young Prince, their son, who 
was only twelve years old, who could do homage to her brother in 
his stead, and in whose company she would immediately return.  The 
King sent him:  but, both he and the Queen remained at the French 
Court, and Roger Mortimer became the Queen's lover.

When the King wrote, again and again, to the Queen to come home, 
she did not reply that she despised him too much to live with him 
any more (which was the truth), but said she was afraid of the two 
Despensers.  In short, her design was to overthrow the favourites' 
power, and the King's power, such as it was, and invade England.  
Having obtained a French force of two thousand men, and being 
joined by all the English exiles then in France, she landed, within 
a year, at Orewell, in Suffolk, where she was immediately joined by 
the Earls of Kent and Norfolk, the King's two brothers; by other 
powerful noblemen; and lastly, by the first English general who was 
despatched to check her:  who went over to her with all his men.  
The people of London, receiving these tidings, would do nothing for 
the King, but broke open the Tower, let out all his prisoners, and 
threw up their caps and hurrahed for the beautiful Queen.

The King, with his two favourites, fled to Bristol, where he left 
old Despenser in charge of the town and castle, while he went on 
with the son to Wales.  The Bristol men being opposed to the King, 
and it being impossible to hold the town with enemies everywhere 
within the walls, Despenser yielded it up on the third day, and was 
instantly brought to trial for having traitorously influenced what 
was called 'the King's mind' - though I doubt if the King ever had 
any.  He was a venerable old man, upwards of ninety years of age, 
but his age gained no respect or mercy.  He was hanged, torn open 
while he was yet alive, cut up into pieces, and thrown to the dogs.  
His son was soon taken, tried at Hereford before the same judge on 
a long series of foolish charges, found guilty, and hanged upon a 
gallows fifty feet high, with a chaplet of nettles round his head.  
His poor old father and he were innocent enough of any worse crimes 
than the crime of having been friends of a King, on whom, as a mere 
man, they would never have deigned to cast a favourable look.  It 
is a bad crime, I know, and leads to worse; but, many lords and 
gentlemen - I even think some ladies, too, if I recollect right - 
have committed it in England, who have neither been given to the 
dogs, nor hanged up fifty feet high.

The wretched King was running here and there, all this time, and 
never getting anywhere in particular, until he gave himself up, and 
was taken off to Kenilworth Castle.  When he was safely lodged 
there, the Queen went to London and met the Parliament.  And the 
Bishop of Hereford, who was the most skilful of her friends, said, 
What was to be done now?  Here was an imbecile, indolent, miserable 
King upon the throne; wouldn't it be better to take him off, and 
put his son there instead?  I don't know whether the Queen really 
pitied him at this pass, but she began to cry; so, the Bishop said, 
Well, my Lords and Gentlemen, what do you think, upon the whole, of 
sending down to Kenilworth, and seeing if His Majesty (God bless 
him, and forbid we should depose him!) won't resign?

My Lords and Gentlemen thought it a good notion, so a deputation of 
them went down to Kenilworth; and there the King came into the 
great hall of the Castle, commonly dressed in a poor black gown; 
and when he saw a certain bishop among them, fell down, poor 
feeble-headed man, and made a wretched spectacle of himself.  
Somebody lifted him up, and then SIR WILLIAM TRUSSEL, the Speaker 
of the House of Commons, almost frightened him to death by making 
him a tremendous speech to the effect that he was no longer a King, 
and that everybody renounced allegiance to him.  After which, SIR 
THOMAS BLOUNT, the Steward of the Household, nearly finished him, 
by coming forward and breaking his white wand - which was a 
ceremony only performed at a King's death.  Being asked in this 
pressing manner what he thought of resigning, the King said he 
thought it was the best thing he could do.  So, he did it, and they 
proclaimed his son next day.

I wish I could close his history by saying that he lived a harmless 
life in the Castle and the Castle gardens at Kenilworth, many years 
- that he had a favourite, and plenty to eat and drink - and, 
having that, wanted nothing.  But he was shamefully humiliated.  He 
was outraged, and slighted, and had dirty water from ditches given 
him to shave with, and wept and said he would have clean warm 
water, and was altogether very miserable.  He was moved from this 
castle to that castle, and from that castle to the other castle, 
because this lord or that lord, or the other lord, was too kind to 
him:  until at last he came to Berkeley Castle, near the River 
Severn, where (the Lord Berkeley being then ill and absent) he fell 
into the hands of two black ruffians, called THOMAS GOURNAY and 
WILLIAM OGLE.

One night - it was the night of September the twenty-first, one 
thousand three hundred and twenty-seven - dreadful screams were 
heard, by the startled people in the neighbouring town, ringing 
through the thick walls of the Castle, and the dark, deep night; 
and they said, as they were thus horribly awakened from their 
sleep, 'May Heaven be merciful to the King; for those cries forbode 
that no good is being done to him in his dismal prison!'  Next 
morning he was dead - not bruised, or stabbed, or marked upon the 
body, but much distorted in the face; and it was whispered 
afterwards, that those two villains, Gournay and Ogle, had burnt up 
his inside with a red-hot iron.

If you ever come near Gloucester, and see the centre tower of its 
beautiful Cathedral, with its four rich pinnacles, rising lightly 
in the air; you may remember that the wretched Edward the Second 
was buried in the old abbey of that ancient city, at forty-three 
years old, after being for nineteen years and a half a perfectly 
incapable King.



CHAPTER XVIII - ENGLAND UNDER EDWARD THE THIRD



ROGER MORTIMER, the Queen's lover (who escaped to France in the 
last chapter), was far from profiting by the examples he had had of 
the fate of favourites.  Having, through the Queen's influence, 
come into possession of the estates of the two Despensers, he 
became extremely proud and ambitious, and sought to be the real 
ruler of England.  The young King, who was crowned at fourteen 
years of age with all the usual solemnities, resolved not to bear 
this, and soon pursued Mortimer to his ruin.

The people themselves were not fond of Mortimer - first, because he 
was a Royal favourite; secondly, because he was supposed to have 
helped to make a peace with Scotland which now took place, and in 
virtue of which the young King's sister Joan, only seven years old, 
was promised in marriage to David, the son and heir of Robert 
Bruce, who was only five years old.  The nobles hated Mortimer 
because of his pride, riches, and power.  They went so far as to 
take up arms against him; but were obliged to submit.  The Earl of 
Kent, one of those who did so, but who afterwards went over to 
Mortimer and the Queen, was made an example of in the following 
cruel manner:

He seems to have been anything but a wise old earl; and he was 
persuaded by the agents of the favourite and the Queen, that poor 
King Edward the Second was not really dead; and thus was betrayed 
into writing letters favouring his rightful claim to the throne.  
This was made out to be high treason, and he was tried, found 
guilty, and sentenced to be executed.  They took the poor old lord 
outside the town of Winchester, and there kept him waiting some 
three or four hours until they could find somebody to cut off his 
head.  At last, a convict said he would do it, if the government 
would pardon him in return; and they gave him the pardon; and at 
one blow he put the Earl of Kent out of his last suspense.

While the Queen was in France, she had found a lovely and good 
young lady, named Philippa, who she thought would make an excellent 
wife for her son.  The young King married this lady, soon after he 
came to the throne; and her first child, Edward, Prince of Wales, 
afterwards became celebrated, as we shall presently see, under the 
famous title of EDWARD THE BLACK PRINCE.

The young King, thinking the time ripe for the downfall of 
Mortimer, took counsel with Lord Montacute how he should proceed.  
A Parliament was going to be held at Nottingham, and that lord 
recommended that the favourite should be seized by night in 
Nottingham Castle, where he was sure to be.  Now, this, like many 
other things, was more easily said than done; because, to guard 
against treachery, the great gates of the Castle were locked every 
night, and the great keys were carried up-stairs to the Queen, who 
laid them under her own pillow.  But the Castle had a governor, and 
the governor being Lord Montacute's friend, confided to him how he 
knew of a secret passage underground, hidden from observation by 
the weeds and brambles with which it was overgrown; and how, 
through that passage, the conspirators might enter in the dead of 
the night, and go straight to Mortimer's room.  Accordingly, upon a 
certain dark night, at midnight, they made their way through this 
dismal place:  startling the rats, and frightening the owls and 
bats:  and came safely to the bottom of the main tower of the 
Castle, where the King met them, and took them up a profoundly-dark 
staircase in a deep silence.  They soon heard the voice of Mortimer 
in council with some friends; and bursting into the room with a 
sudden noise, took him prisoner.  The Queen cried out from her bed-
chamber, 'Oh, my sweet son, my dear son, spare my gentle Mortimer!'  
They carried him off, however; and, before the next Parliament, 
accused him of having made differences between the young King and 
his mother, and of having brought about the death of the Earl of 
Kent, and even of the late King; for, as you know by this time, 
when they wanted to get rid of a man in those old days, they were 
not very particular of what they accused him.  Mortimer was found 
guilty of all this, and was sentenced to be hanged at Tyburn.  The 
King shut his mother up in genteel confinement, where she passed 
the rest of her life; and now he became King in earnest.

The first effort he made was to conquer Scotland.  The English 
lords who had lands in Scotland, finding that their rights were not 
respected under the late peace, made war on their own account:  
choosing for their general, Edward, the son of John Baliol, who 
made such a vigorous fight, that in less than two months he won the 
whole Scottish Kingdom.  He was joined, when thus triumphant, by 
the King and Parliament; and he and the King in person besieged the 
Scottish forces in Berwick.  The whole Scottish army coming to the 
assistance of their countrymen, such a furious battle ensued, that 
thirty thousand men are said to have been killed in it.  Baliol was 
then crowned King of Scotland, doing homage to the King of England; 
but little came of his successes after all, for the Scottish men 
rose against him, within no very long time, and David Bruce came 
back within ten years and took his kingdom.

France was a far richer country than Scotland, and the King had a 
much greater mind to conquer it.  So, he let Scotland alone, and 
pretended that he had a claim to the French throne in right of his 
mother.  He had, in reality, no claim at all; but that mattered 
little in those times.  He brought over to his cause many little 
princes and sovereigns, and even courted the alliance of the people 
of Flanders - a busy, working community, who had very small respect 
for kings, and whose head man was a brewer.  With such forces as he 
raised by these means, Edward invaded France; but he did little by 
that, except run into debt in carrying on the war to the extent of 
three hundred thousand pounds.  The next year he did better; 
gaining a great sea-fight in the harbour of Sluys.  This success, 
however, was very shortlived, for the Flemings took fright at the 
siege of Saint Omer and ran away, leaving their weapons and baggage 
behind them.  Philip, the French King, coming up with his army, and 
Edward being very anxious to decide the war, proposed to settle the 
difference by single combat with him, or by a fight of one hundred 
knights on each side.  The French King said, he thanked him; but 
being very well as he was, he would rather not.  So, after some 
skirmishing and talking, a short peace was made.

It was soon broken by King Edward's favouring the cause of John, 
Earl of Montford; a French nobleman, who asserted a claim of his 
own against the French King, and offered to do homage to England 
for the Crown of France, if he could obtain it through England's 
help.  This French lord, himself, was soon defeated by the French 
King's son, and shut up in a tower in Paris; but his wife, a 
courageous and beautiful woman, who is said to have had the courage 
of a man, and the heart of a lion, assembled the people of 
Brittany, where she then was; and, showing them her infant son, 
made many pathetic entreaties to them not to desert her and their 
young Lord.  They took fire at this appeal, and rallied round her 
in the strong castle of Hennebon.  Here she was not only besieged 
without by the French under Charles de Blois, but was endangered 
within by a dreary old bishop, who was always representing to the 
people what horrors they must undergo if they were faithful - first 
from famine, and afterwards from fire and sword.  But this noble 
lady, whose heart never failed her, encouraged her soldiers by her 
own example; went from post to post like a great general; even 
mounted on horseback fully armed, and, issuing from the castle by a 
by-path, fell upon the French camp, set fire to the tents, and 
threw the whole force into disorder.  This done, she got safely 
back to Hennebon again, and was received with loud shouts of joy by 
the defenders of the castle, who had given her up for lost.  As 
they were now very short of provisions, however, and as they could 
not dine off enthusiasm, and as the old bishop was always saying, 
'I told you what it would come to!' they began to lose heart, and 
to talk of yielding the castle up.  The brave Countess retiring to 
an upper room and looking with great grief out to sea, where she 
expected relief from England, saw, at this very time, the English 
ships in the distance, and was relieved and rescued!  Sir Walter 
Manning, the English commander, so admired her courage, that, being 
come into the castle with the English knights, and having made a 
feast there, he assaulted the French by way of dessert, and beat 
them off triumphantly.  Then he and the knights came back to the 
castle with great joy; and the Countess who had watched them from a 
high tower, thanked them with all her heart, and kissed them every 
one.

This noble lady distinguished herself afterwards in a sea-fight 
with the French off Guernsey, when she was on her way to England to 
ask for more troops.  Her great spirit roused another lady, the 
wife of another French lord (whom the French King very barbarously 
murdered), to distinguish herself scarcely less.  The time was fast 
coming, however, when Edward, Prince of Wales, was to be the great 
star of this French and English war.

It was in the month of July, in the year one thousand three hundred 
and forty-six, when the King embarked at Southampton for France, 
with an army of about thirty thousand men in all, attended by the 
Prince of Wales and by several of the chief nobles.  He landed at 
La Hogue in Normandy; and, burning and destroying as he went, 
according to custom, advanced up the left bank of the River Seine, 
and fired the small towns even close to Paris; but, being watched 
from the right bank of the river by the French King and all his 
army, it came to this at last, that Edward found himself, on 
Saturday the twenty-sixth of August, one thousand three hundred and 
forty-six, on a rising ground behind the little French village of 
Crecy, face to face with the French King's force.  And, although 
the French King had an enormous army - in number more than eight 
times his - he there resolved to beat him or be beaten.

The young Prince, assisted by the Earl of Oxford and the Earl of 
Warwick, led the first division of the English army; two other 
great Earls led the second; and the King, the third.  When the 
morning dawned, the King received the sacrament, and heard prayers, 
and then, mounted on horseback with a white wand in his hand, rode 
from company to company, and rank to rank, cheering and encouraging 
both officers and men.  Then the whole army breakfasted, each man 
sitting on the ground where he had stood; and then they remained 
quietly on the ground with their weapons ready.

Up came the French King with all his great force.  It was dark and 
angry weather; there was an eclipse of the sun; there was a 
thunder-storm, accompanied with tremendous rain; the frightened 
birds flew screaming above the soldiers' heads.  A certain captain 
in the French army advised the French King, who was by no means 
cheerful, not to begin the battle until the morrow.  The King, 
taking this advice, gave the word to halt.  But, those behind not 
understanding it, or desiring to be foremost with the rest, came 
pressing on.  The roads for a great distance were covered with this 
immense army, and with the common people from the villages, who 
were flourishing their rude weapons, and making a great noise.  
Owing to these circumstances, the French army advanced in the 
greatest confusion; every French lord doing what he liked with his 
own men, and putting out the men of every other French lord.

Now, their King relied strongly upon a great body of cross-bowmen 
from Genoa; and these he ordered to the front to begin the battle, 
on finding that he could not stop it.  They shouted once, they 
shouted twice, they shouted three times, to alarm the English 
archers; but, the English would have heard them shout three 
thousand times and would have never moved.  At last the cross-
bowmen went forward a little, and began to discharge their bolts; 
upon which, the English let fly such a hail of arrows, that the 
Genoese speedily made off - for their cross-bows, besides being 
heavy to carry, required to be wound up with a handle, and 
consequently took time to re-load; the English, on the other hand, 
could discharge their arrows almost as fast as the arrows could 
fly.

When the French King saw the Genoese turning, he cried out to his 
men to kill those scoundrels, who were doing harm instead of 
service.  This increased the confusion.  Meanwhile the English 
archers, continuing to shoot as fast as ever, shot down great 
numbers of the French soldiers and knights; whom certain sly 
Cornish-men and Welshmen, from the English army, creeping along the 
ground, despatched with great knives.

The Prince and his division were at this time so hard-pressed, that 
the Earl of Warwick sent a message to the King, who was overlooking 
the battle from a windmill, beseeching him to send more aid.

'Is my son killed?' said the King.

'No, sire, please God,' returned the messenger.

'Is he wounded?' said the King.

'No, sire.'

'Is he thrown to the ground?' said the King.

'No, sire, not so; but, he is very hard-pressed.'

'Then,' said the King, 'go back to those who sent you, and tell 
them I shall send no aid; because I set my heart upon my son 
proving himself this day a brave knight, and because I am resolved, 
please God, that the honour of a great victory shall be his!'

These bold words, being reported to the Prince and his division, so 
raised their spirits, that they fought better than ever.  The King 
of France charged gallantly with his men many times; but it was of 
no use.  Night closing in, his horse was killed under him by an 
English arrow, and the knights and nobles who had clustered thick 
about him early in the day, were now completely scattered.  At 
last, some of his few remaining followers led him off the field by 
force since he would not retire of himself, and they journeyed away 
to Amiens.  The victorious English, lighting their watch-fires, 
made merry on the field, and the King, riding to meet his gallant 
son, took him in his arms, kissed him, and told him that he had 
acted nobly, and proved himself worthy of the day and of the crown.  
While it was yet night, King Edward was hardly aware of the great 
victory he had gained; but, next day, it was discovered that eleven 
princes, twelve hundred knights, and thirty thousand common men lay 
dead upon the French side.  Among these was the King of Bohemia, an 
old blind man; who, having been told that his son was wounded in 
the battle, and that no force could stand against the Black Prince, 
called to him two knights, put himself on horse-back between them, 
fastened the three bridles together, and dashed in among the 
English, where he was presently slain.  He bore as his crest three 
white ostrich feathers, with the motto ICH DIEN, signifying in 
English 'I serve.'  This crest and motto were taken by the Prince 
of Wales in remembrance of that famous day, and have been borne by 
the Prince of Wales ever since.

Five days after this great battle, the King laid siege to Calais.  
This siege - ever afterwards memorable - lasted nearly a year.  In 
order to starve the inhabitants out, King Edward built so many 
wooden houses for the lodgings of his troops, that it is said their 
quarters looked like a second Calais suddenly sprung around the 
first.  Early in the siege, the governor of the town drove out what 
he called the useless mouths, to the number of seventeen hundred 
persons, men and women, young and old.  King Edward allowed them to 
pass through his lines, and even fed them, and dismissed them with 
money; but, later in the siege, he was not so merciful - five 
hundred more, who were afterwards driven out, dying of starvation 
and misery.  The garrison were so hard-pressed at last, that they 
sent a letter to King Philip, telling him that they had eaten all 
the horses, all the dogs, and all the rats and mice that could be 
found in the place; and, that if he did not relieve them, they must 
either surrender to the English, or eat one another.  Philip made 
one effort to give them relief; but they were so hemmed in by the 
English power, that he could not succeed, and was fain to leave the 
place.  Upon this they hoisted the English flag, and surrendered to 
King Edward.  'Tell your general,' said he to the humble messengers 
who came out of the town, 'that I require to have sent here, six of 
the most distinguished citizens, bare-legged, and in their shirts, 
with ropes about their necks; and let those six men bring with them 
the keys of the castle and the town.'

When the Governor of Calais related this to the people in the 
Market-place, there was great weeping and distress; in the midst of 
which, one worthy citizen, named Eustace de Saint Pierre, rose up 
and said, that if the six men required were not sacrificed, the 
whole population would be; therefore, he offered himself as the 
first.  Encouraged by this bright example, five other worthy 
citizens rose up one after another, and offered themselves to save 
the rest.  The Governor, who was too badly wounded to be able to 
walk, mounted a poor old horse that had not been eaten, and 
conducted these good men to the gate, while all the people cried 
and mourned.

Edward received them wrathfully, and ordered the heads of the whole 
six to be struck off.  However, the good Queen fell upon her knees, 
and besought the King to give them up to her.  The King replied, 'I 
wish you had been somewhere else; but I cannot refuse you.'  So she 
had them properly dressed, made a feast for them, and sent them 
back with a handsome present, to the great rejoicing of the whole 
camp.  I hope the people of Calais loved the daughter to whom she 
gave birth soon afterwards, for her gentle mother's sake.

Now came that terrible disease, the Plague, into Europe, hurrying 
from the heart of China; and killed the wretched people - 
especially the poor - in such enormous numbers, that one-half of 
the inhabitants of England are related to have died of it.  It 
killed the cattle, in great numbers, too; and so few working men 
remained alive, that there were not enough left to till the ground.

After eight years of differing and quarrelling, the Prince of Wales 
again invaded France with an army of sixty thousand men.  He went 
through the south of the country, burning and plundering 
wheresoever he went; while his father, who had still the Scottish 
war upon his hands, did the like in Scotland, but was harassed and 
worried in his retreat from that country by the Scottish men, who 
repaid his cruelties with interest.

The French King, Philip, was now dead, and was succeeded by his son 
John.  The Black Prince, called by that name from the colour of the 
armour he wore to set off his fair complexion, continuing to burn 
and destroy in France, roused John into determined opposition; and 
so cruel had the Black Prince been in his campaign, and so severely 
had the French peasants suffered, that he could not find one who, 
for love, or money, or the fear of death, would tell him what the 
French King was doing, or where he was.  Thus it happened that he 
came upon the French King's forces, all of a sudden, near the town 
of Poitiers, and found that the whole neighbouring country was 
occupied by a vast French army.  'God help us!' said the Black 
Prince, 'we must make the best of it.'

So, on a Sunday morning, the eighteenth of September, the Prince 
whose army was now reduced to ten thousand men in all - prepared to 
give battle to the French King, who had sixty thousand horse alone.  
While he was so engaged, there came riding from the French camp, a 
Cardinal, who had persuaded John to let him offer terms, and try to 
save the shedding of Christian blood.  'Save my honour,' said the 
Prince to this good priest, 'and save the honour of my army, and I 
will make any reasonable terms.'  He offered to give up all the 
towns, castles, and prisoners, he had taken, and to swear to make 
no war in France for seven years; but, as John would hear of 
nothing but his surrender, with a hundred of his chief knights, the 
treaty was broken off, and the Prince said quietly - 'God defend 
the right; we shall fight to-morrow.'

Therefore, on the Monday morning, at break of day, the two armies 
prepared for battle.  The English were posted in a strong place, 
which could only be approached by one narrow lane, skirted by 
hedges on both sides.  The French attacked them by this lane; but 
were so galled and slain by English arrows from behind the hedges, 
that they were forced to retreat.  Then went six hundred English 
bowmen round about, and, coming upon the rear of the French army, 
rained arrows on them thick and fast.  The French knights, thrown 
into confusion, quitted their banners and dispersed in all 
directions.  Said Sir John Chandos to the Prince, 'Ride forward, 
noble Prince, and the day is yours.  The King of France is so 
valiant a gentleman, that I know he will never fly, and may be 
taken prisoner.'  Said the Prince to this, 'Advance, English 
banners, in the name of God and St. George!' and on they pressed 
until they came up with the French King, fighting fiercely with his 
battle-axe, and, when all his nobles had forsaken him, attended 
faithfully to the last by his youngest son Philip, only sixteen 
years of age.  Father and son fought well, and the King had already 
two wounds in his face, and had been beaten down, when he at last 
delivered himself to a banished French knight, and gave him his 
right-hand glove in token that he had done so.

The Black Prince was generous as well as brave, and he invited his 
royal prisoner to supper in his tent, and waited upon him at table, 
and, when they afterwards rode into London in a gorgeous 
procession, mounted the French King on a fine cream-coloured horse, 
and rode at his side on a little pony.  This was all very kind, but 
I think it was, perhaps, a little theatrical too, and has been made 
more meritorious than it deserved to be; especially as I am 
inclined to think that the greatest kindness to the King of France 
would have been not to have shown him to the people at all.  
However, it must be said, for these acts of politeness, that, in 
course of time, they did much to soften the horrors of war and the 
passions of conquerors.  It was a long, long time before the common 
soldiers began to have the benefit of such courtly deeds; but they 
did at last; and thus it is possible that a poor soldier who asked 
for quarter at the battle of Waterloo, or any other such great 
fight, may have owed his life indirectly to Edward the Black 
Prince.

At this time there stood in the Strand, in London, a palace called 
the Savoy, which was given up to the captive King of France and his 
son for their residence.  As the King of Scotland had now been King 
Edward's captive for eleven years too, his success was, at this 
time, tolerably complete.  The Scottish business was settled by the 
prisoner being released under the title of Sir David, King of 
Scotland, and by his engaging to pay a large ransom.  The state of 
France encouraged England to propose harder terms to that country, 
where the people rose against the unspeakable cruelty and barbarity 
of its nobles; where the nobles rose in turn against the people; 
where the most frightful outrages were committed on all sides; and 
where the insurrection of the peasants, called the insurrection of 
the Jacquerie, from Jacques, a common Christian name among the 
country people of France, awakened terrors and hatreds that have 
scarcely yet passed away.  A treaty called the Great Peace, was at 
last signed, under which King Edward agreed to give up the greater 
part of his conquests, and King John to pay, within six years, a 
ransom of three million crowns of gold.  He was so beset by his own 
nobles and courtiers for having yielded to these conditions - 
though they could help him to no better - that he came back of his 
own will to his old palace-prison of the Savoy, and there died.

There was a Sovereign of Castile at that time, called PEDRO THE 
CRUEL, who deserved the name remarkably well:  having committed, 
among other cruelties, a variety of murders.  This amiable monarch 
being driven from his throne for his crimes, went to the province 
of Bordeaux, where the Black Prince - now married to his cousin 
JOAN, a pretty widow - was residing, and besought his help.  The 
Prince, who took to him much more kindly than a prince of such fame 
ought to have taken to such a ruffian, readily listened to his fair 
promises, and agreeing to help him, sent secret orders to some 
troublesome disbanded soldiers of his and his father's, who called 
themselves the Free Companions, and who had been a pest to the 
French people, for some time, to aid this Pedro.  The Prince, 
himself, going into Spain to head the army of relief, soon set 
Pedro on his throne again - where he no sooner found himself, than, 
of course, he behaved like the villain he was, broke his word 
without the least shame, and abandoned all the promises he had made 
to the Black Prince.

Now, it had cost the Prince a good deal of money to pay soldiers to 
support this murderous King; and finding himself, when he came back 
disgusted to Bordeaux, not only in bad health, but deeply in debt, 
he began to tax his French subjects to pay his creditors.  They 
appealed to the French King, CHARLES; war again broke out; and the 
French town of Limoges, which the Prince had greatly benefited, 
went over to the French King.  Upon this he ravaged the province of 
which it was the capital; burnt, and plundered, and killed in the 
old sickening way; and refused mercy to the prisoners, men, women, 
and children taken in the offending town, though he was so ill and 
so much in need of pity himself from Heaven, that he was carried in 
a litter.  He lived to come home and make himself popular with the 
people and Parliament, and he died on Trinity Sunday, the eighth of 
June, one thousand three hundred and seventy-six, at forty-six 
years old.

The whole nation mourned for him as one of the most renowned and 
beloved princes it had ever had; and he was buried with great 
lamentations in Canterbury Cathedral.  Near to the tomb of Edward 
the Confessor, his monument, with his figure, carved in stone, and 
represented in the old black armour, lying on its back, may be seen 
at this day, with an ancient coat of mail, a helmet, and a pair of 
gauntlets hanging from a beam above it, which most people like to 
believe were once worn by the Black Prince.

King Edward did not outlive his renowned son, long.  He was old, 
and one Alice Perrers, a beautiful lady, had contrived to make him 
so fond of her in his old age, that he could refuse her nothing, 
and made himself ridiculous.  She little deserved his love, or - 
what I dare say she valued a great deal more - the jewels of the 
late Queen, which he gave her among other rich presents.  She took 
the very ring from his finger on the morning of the day when he 
died, and left him to be pillaged by his faithless servants.  Only 
one good priest was true to him, and attended him to the last.

Besides being famous for the great victories I have related, the 
reign of King Edward the Third was rendered memorable in better 
ways, by the growth of architecture and the erection of Windsor 
Castle.  In better ways still, by the rising up of WICKLIFFE, 
originally a poor parish priest:  who devoted himself to exposing, 
with wonderful power and success, the ambition and corruption of 
the Pope, and of the whole church of which he was the head.

Some of those Flemings were induced to come to England in this 
reign too, and to settle in Norfolk, where they made better woollen 
cloths than the English had ever had before.  The Order of the 
Garter (a very fine thing in its way, but hardly so important as 
good clothes for the nation) also dates from this period.  The King 
is said to have picked 'up a lady's garter at a ball, and to have 
said, HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE - in English, 'Evil be to him who 
evil thinks of it.'  The courtiers were usually glad to imitate 
what the King said or did, and hence from a slight incident the 
Order of the Garter was instituted, and became a great dignity.  So 
the story goes.



CHAPTER XIX - ENGLAND UNDER RICHARD THE SECOND



RICHARD, son of the Black Prince, a boy eleven years of age, 
succeeded to the Crown under the title of King Richard the Second.  
The whole English nation were ready to admire him for the sake of 
his brave father.  As to the lords and ladies about the Court, they 
declared him to be the most beautiful, the wisest, and the best - 
even of princes - whom the lords and ladies about the Court, 
generally declare to be the most beautiful, the wisest, and the 
best of mankind.  To flatter a poor boy in this base manner was not 
a very likely way to develop whatever good was in him; and it 
brought him to anything but a good or happy end.

The Duke of Lancaster, the young King's uncle - commonly called 
John of Gaunt, from having been born at Ghent, which the common 
people so pronounced - was supposed to have some thoughts of the 
throne himself; but, as he was not popular, and the memory of the 
Black Prince was, he submitted to his nephew.

The war with France being still unsettled, the Government of 
England wanted money to provide for the expenses that might arise 
out of it; accordingly a certain tax, called the Poll-tax, which 
had originated in the last reign, was ordered to be levied on the 
people.  This was a tax on every person in the kingdom, male and 
female, above the age of fourteen, of three groats (or three four-
penny pieces) a year; clergymen were charged more, and only beggars 
were exempt.

I have no need to repeat that the common people of England had long 
been suffering under great oppression.  They were still the mere 
slaves of the lords of the land on which they lived, and were on 
most occasions harshly and unjustly treated.  But, they had begun 
by this time to think very seriously of not bearing quite so much; 
and, probably, were emboldened by that French insurrection I 
mentioned in the last chapter.

The people of Essex rose against the Poll-tax, and being severely 
handled by the government officers, killed some of them.  At this 
very time one of the tax-collectors, going his rounds from house to 
house, at Dartford in Kent came to the cottage of one WAT, a tiler 
by trade, and claimed the tax upon his daughter.  Her mother, who 
was at home, declared that she was under the age of fourteen; upon 
that, the collector (as other collectors had already done in 
different parts of England) behaved in a savage way, and brutally 
insulted Wat Tyler's daughter.  The daughter screamed, the mother 
screamed.  Wat the Tiler, who was at work not far off, ran to the 
spot, and did what any honest father under such provocation might 
have done - struck the collector dead at a blow.

Instantly the people of that town uprose as one man.  They made Wat 
Tyler their leader; they joined with the people of Essex, who were 
in arms under a priest called JACK STRAW; they took out of prison 
another priest named JOHN BALL; and gathering in numbers as they 
went along, advanced, in a great confused army of poor men, to 
Blackheath.  It is said that they wanted to abolish all property, 
and to declare all men equal.  I do not think this very likely; 
because they stopped the travellers on the roads and made them 
swear to be true to King Richard and the people.  Nor were they at 
all disposed to injure those who had done them no harm, merely 
because they were of high station; for, the King's mother, who had 
to pass through their camp at Blackheath, on her way to her young 
son, lying for safety in the Tower of London, had merely to kiss a 
few dirty-faced rough-bearded men who were noisily fond of royalty, 
and so got away in perfect safety.  Next day the whole mass marched 
on to London Bridge.

There was a drawbridge in the middle, which WILLIAM WALWORTH the 
Mayor caused to be raised to prevent their coming into the city; 
but they soon terrified the citizens into lowering it again, and 
spread themselves, with great uproar, over the streets.  They broke 
open the prisons; they burned the papers in Lambeth Palace; they 
destroyed the DUKE OF LANCASTER'S Palace, the Savoy, in the Strand, 
said to be the most beautiful and splendid in England; they set 
fire to the books and documents in the Temple; and made a great 
riot.  Many of these outrages were committed in drunkenness; since 
those citizens, who had well-filled cellars, were only too glad to 
throw them open to save the rest of their property; but even the 
drunken rioters were very careful to steal nothing.  They were so 
angry with one man, who was seen to take a silver cup at the Savoy 
Palace, and put it in his breast, that they drowned him in the 
river, cup and all.

The young King had been taken out to treat with them before they 
committed these excesses; but, he and the people about him were so 
frightened by the riotous shouts, that they got back to the Tower 
in the best way they could.  This made the insurgents bolder; so 
they went on rioting away, striking off the heads of those who did 
not, at a moment's notice, declare for King Richard and the people; 
and killing as many of the unpopular persons whom they supposed to 
be their enemies as they could by any means lay hold of.  In this 
manner they passed one very violent day, and then proclamation was 
made that the King would meet them at Mile-end, and grant their 
requests.

The rioters went to Mile-end to the number of sixty thousand, and 
the King met them there, and to the King the rioters peaceably 
proposed four conditions.  First, that neither they, nor their 
children, nor any coming after them, should be made slaves any 
more.  Secondly, that the rent of land should be fixed at a certain 
price in money, instead of being paid in service.  Thirdly, that 
they should have liberty to buy and sell in all markets and public 
places, like other free men.  Fourthly, that they should be 
pardoned for past offences.  Heaven knows, there was nothing very 
unreasonable in these proposals!  The young King deceitfully 
pretended to think so, and kept thirty clerks up, all night, 
writing out a charter accordingly.

Now, Wat Tyler himself wanted more than this.  He wanted the entire 
abolition of the forest laws.  He was not at Mile-end with the 
rest, but, while that meeting was being held, broke into the Tower 
of London and slew the archbishop and the treasurer, for whose 
heads the people had cried out loudly the day before.  He and his 
men even thrust their swords into the bed of the Princess of Wales 
while the Princess was in it, to make certain that none of their 
enemies were concealed there.

So, Wat and his men still continued armed, and rode about the city.  
Next morning, the King with a small train of some sixty gentlemen - 
among whom was WALWORTH the Mayor - rode into Smithfield, and saw 
Wat and his people at a little distance.  Says Wat to his men, 
'There is the King.  I will go speak with him, and tell him what we 
want.'

Straightway Wat rode up to him, and began to talk.  'King,' says 
Wat, 'dost thou see all my men there?'

'Ah,' says the King.  'Why?'

'Because,' says Wat, 'they are all at my command, and have sworn to 
do whatever I bid them.'

Some declared afterwards that as Wat said this, he laid his hand on 
the King's bridle.  Others declared that he was seen to play with 
his own dagger.  I think, myself, that he just spoke to the King 
like a rough, angry man as he was, and did nothing more.  At any 
rate he was expecting no attack, and preparing for no resistance, 
when Walworth the Mayor did the not very valiant deed of drawing a 
short sword and stabbing him in the throat.  He dropped from his 
horse, and one of the King's people speedily finished him.  So fell 
Wat Tyler.  Fawners and flatterers made a mighty triumph of it, and 
set up a cry which will occasionally find an echo to this day.  But 
Wat was a hard-working man, who had suffered much, and had been 
foully outraged; and it is probable that he was a man of a much 
higher nature and a much braver spirit than any of the parasites 
who exulted then, or have exulted since, over his defeat.

Seeing Wat down, his men immediately bent their bows to avenge his 
fall.  If the young King had not had presence of mind at that 
dangerous moment, both he and the Mayor to boot, might have 
followed Tyler pretty fast.  But the King riding up to the crowd, 
cried out that Tyler was a traitor, and that he would be their 
leader.  They were so taken by surprise, that they set up a great 
shouting, and followed the boy until he was met at Islington by a 
large body of soldiers.

The end of this rising was the then usual end.  As soon as the King 
found himself safe, he unsaid all he had said, and undid all he had 
done; some fifteen hundred of the rioters were tried (mostly in 
Essex) with great rigour, and executed with great cruelty.  Many of 
them were hanged on gibbets, and left there as a terror to the 
country people; and, because their miserable friends took some of 
the bodies down to bury, the King ordered the rest to be chained up 
- which was the beginning of the barbarous custom of hanging in 
chains.  The King's falsehood in this business makes such a pitiful 
figure, that I think Wat Tyler appears in history as beyond 
comparison the truer and more respectable man of the two.

Richard was now sixteen years of age, and married Anne of Bohemia, 
an excellent princess, who was called 'the good Queen Anne.'  She 
deserved a better husband; for the King had been fawned and 
flattered into a treacherous, wasteful, dissolute, bad young man.

There were two Popes at this time (as if one were not enough!), and 
their quarrels involved Europe in a great deal of trouble.  
Scotland was still troublesome too; and at home there was much 
jealousy and distrust, and plotting and counter-plotting, because 
the King feared the ambition of his relations, and particularly of 
his uncle, the Duke of Lancaster, and the duke had his party 
against the King, and the King had his party against the duke.  Nor 
were these home troubles lessened when the duke went to Castile to 
urge his claim to the crown of that kingdom; for then the Duke of 
Gloucester, another of Richard's uncles, opposed him, and 
influenced the Parliament to demand the dismissal of the King's 
favourite ministers.  The King said in reply, that he would not for 
such men dismiss the meanest servant in his kitchen.  But, it had 
begun to signify little what a King said when a Parliament was 
determined; so Richard was at last obliged to give way, and to 
agree to another Government of the kingdom, under a commission of 
fourteen nobles, for a year.  His uncle of Gloucester was at the 
head of this commission, and, in fact, appointed everybody 
composing it.

Having done all this, the King declared as soon as he saw an 
opportunity that he had never meant to do it, and that it was all 
illegal; and he got the judges secretly to sign a declaration to 
that effect.  The secret oozed out directly, and was carried to the 
Duke of Gloucester.  The Duke of Gloucester, at the head of forty 
thousand men, met the King on his entering into London to enforce 
his authority; the King was helpless against him; his favourites 
and ministers were impeached and were mercilessly executed.  Among 
them were two men whom the people regarded with very different 
feelings; one, Robert Tresilian, Chief Justice, who was hated for 
having made what was called 'the bloody circuit' to try the 
rioters; the other, Sir Simon Burley, an honourable knight, who had 
been the dear friend of the Black Prince, and the governor and 
guardian of the King.  For this gentleman's life the good Queen 
even begged of Gloucester on her knees; but Gloucester (with or 
without reason) feared and hated him, and replied, that if she 
valued her husband's crown, she had better beg no more.  All this 
was done under what was called by some the wonderful - and by 
others, with better reason, the merciless - Parliament.

But Gloucester's power was not to last for ever.  He held it for 
only a year longer; in which year the famous battle of Otterbourne, 
sung in the old ballad of Chevy Chase, was fought.  When the year 
was out, the King, turning suddenly to Gloucester, in the midst of 
a great council said, 'Uncle, how old am I?'  'Your highness,' 
returned the Duke, 'is in your twenty-second year.'  'Am I so 
much?' said the King; 'then I will manage my own affairs!  I am 
much obliged to you, my good lords, for your past services, but I 
need them no more.'  He followed this up, by appointing a new 
Chancellor and a new Treasurer, and announced to the people that he 
had resumed the Government.  He held it for eight years without 
opposition.  Through all that time, he kept his determination to 
revenge himself some day upon his uncle Gloucester, in his own 
breast.

At last the good Queen died, and then the King, desiring to take a 
second wife, proposed to his council that he should marry Isabella, 
of France, the daughter of Charles the Sixth:  who, the French 
courtiers said (as the English courtiers had said of Richard), was 
a marvel of beauty and wit, and quite a phenomenon - of seven years 
old.  The council were divided about this marriage, but it took 
place.  It secured peace between England and France for a quarter 
of a century; but it was strongly opposed to the prejudices of the 
English people.  The Duke of Gloucester, who was anxious to take 
the occasion of making himself popular, declaimed against it 
loudly, and this at length decided the King to execute the 
vengeance he had been nursing so long.

He went with a gay company to the Duke of Gloucester's house, 
Pleshey Castle, in Essex, where the Duke, suspecting nothing, came 
out into the court-yard to receive his royal visitor.  While the 
King conversed in a friendly manner with the Duchess, the Duke was 
quietly seized, hurried away, shipped for Calais, and lodged in the 
castle there.  His friends, the Earls of Arundel and Warwick, were 
taken in the same treacherous manner, and confined to their 
castles.  A few days after, at Nottingham, they were impeached of 
high treason.  The Earl of Arundel was condemned and beheaded, and 
the Earl of Warwick was banished.  Then, a writ was sent by a 
messenger to the Governor of Calais, requiring him to send the Duke 
of Gloucester over to be tried.  In three days he returned an 
answer that he could not do that, because the Duke of Gloucester 
had died in prison.  The Duke was declared a traitor, his property 
was confiscated to the King, a real or pretended confession he had 
made in prison to one of the Justices of the Common Pleas was 
produced against him, and there was an end of the matter.  How the 
unfortunate duke died, very few cared to know.  Whether he really 
died naturally; whether he killed himself; whether, by the King's 
order, he was strangled, or smothered between two beds (as a 
serving-man of the Governor's named Hall, did afterwards declare), 
cannot be discovered.  There is not much doubt that he was killed, 
somehow or other, by his nephew's orders.  Among the most active 
nobles in these proceedings were the King's cousin, Henry 
Bolingbroke, whom the King had made Duke of Hereford to smooth down 
the old family quarrels, and some others:  who had in the family-
plotting times done just such acts themselves as they now condemned 
in the duke.  They seem to have been a corrupt set of men; but such 
men were easily found about the court in such days.

The people murmured at all this, and were still very sore about the 
French marriage.  The nobles saw how little the King cared for law, 
and how crafty he was, and began to be somewhat afraid for 
themselves.  The King's life was a life of continued feasting and 
excess; his retinue, down to the meanest servants, were dressed in 
the most costly manner, and caroused at his tables, it is related, 
to the number of ten thousand persons every day.  He himself, 
surrounded by a body of ten thousand archers, and enriched by a 
duty on wool which the Commons had granted him for life, saw no 
danger of ever being otherwise than powerful and absolute, and was 
as fierce and haughty as a King could be.

He had two of his old enemies left, in the persons of the Dukes of 
Hereford and Norfolk.  Sparing these no more than the others, he 
tampered with the Duke of Hereford until he got him to declare 
before the Council that the Duke of Norfolk had lately held some 
treasonable talk with him, as he was riding near Brentford; and 
that he had told him, among other things, that he could not believe 
the King's oath - which nobody could, I should think.  For this 
treachery he obtained a pardon, and the Duke of Norfolk was 
summoned to appear and defend himself.  As he denied the charge and 
said his accuser was a liar and a traitor, both noblemen, according 
to the manner of those times, were held in custody, and the truth 
was ordered to be decided by wager of battle at Coventry.  This 
wager of battle meant that whosoever won the combat was to be 
considered in the right; which nonsense meant in effect, that no 
strong man could ever be wrong.  A great holiday was made; a great 
crowd assembled, with much parade and show; and the two combatants 
were about to rush at each other with their lances, when the King, 
sitting in a pavilion to see fair, threw down the truncheon he 
carried in his hand, and forbade the battle.  The Duke of Hereford 
was to be banished for ten years, and the Duke of Norfolk was to be 
banished for life.  So said the King.  The Duke of Hereford went to 
France, and went no farther.  The Duke of Norfolk made a pilgrimage 
to the Holy Land, and afterwards died at Venice of a broken heart.

Faster and fiercer, after this, the King went on in his career.  
The Duke of Lancaster, who was the father of the Duke of Hereford, 
died soon after the departure of his son; and, the King, although 
he had solemnly granted to that son leave to inherit his father's 
property, if it should come to him during his banishment, 
immediately seized it all, like a robber.  The judges were so 
afraid of him, that they disgraced themselves by declaring this 
theft to be just and lawful.  His avarice knew no bounds.  He 
outlawed seventeen counties at once, on a frivolous pretence, 
merely to raise money by way of fines for misconduct.  In short, he 
did as many dishonest things as he could; and cared so little for 
the discontent of his subjects - though even the spaniel favourites 
began to whisper to him that there was such a thing as discontent 
afloat - that he took that time, of all others, for leaving England 
and making an expedition against the Irish.

He was scarcely gone, leaving the DUKE OF YORK Regent in his 
absence, when his cousin, Henry of Hereford, came over from France 
to claim the rights of which he had been so monstrously deprived.  
He was immediately joined by the two great Earls of Northumberland 
and Westmoreland; and his uncle, the Regent, finding the King's 
cause unpopular, and the disinclination of the army to act against 
Henry, very strong, withdrew with the Royal forces towards Bristol.  
Henry, at the head of an army, came from Yorkshire (where he had 
landed) to London and followed him.  They joined their forces - how 
they brought that about, is not distinctly understood - and 
proceeded to Bristol Castle, whither three noblemen had taken the 
young Queen.  The castle surrendering, they presently put those 
three noblemen to death.  The Regent then remained there, and Henry 
went on to Chester.

All this time, the boisterous weather had prevented the King from 
receiving intelligence of what had occurred.  At length it was 
conveyed to him in Ireland, and he sent over the EARL OF SALISBURY, 
who, landing at Conway, rallied the Welshmen, and waited for the 
King a whole fortnight; at the end of that time the Welshmen, who 
were perhaps not very warm for him in the beginning, quite cooled 
down and went home.  When the King did land on the coast at last, 
he came with a pretty good power, but his men cared nothing for 
him, and quickly deserted.  Supposing the Welshmen to be still at 
Conway, he disguised himself as a priest, and made for that place 
in company with his two brothers and some few of their adherents.  
But, there were no Welshmen left - only Salisbury and a hundred 
soldiers.  In this distress, the King's two brothers, Exeter and 
Surrey, offered to go to Henry to learn what his intentions were.  
Surrey, who was true to Richard, was put into prison.  Exeter, who 
was false, took the royal badge, which was a hart, off his shield, 
and assumed the rose, the badge of Henry.  After this, it was 
pretty plain to the King what Henry's intentions were, without 
sending any more messengers to ask.

The fallen King, thus deserted - hemmed in on all sides, and 
pressed with hunger - rode here and rode there, and went to this 
castle, and went to that castle, endeavouring to obtain some 
provisions, but could find none.  He rode wretchedly back to 
Conway, and there surrendered himself to the Earl of 
Northumberland, who came from Henry, in reality to take him 
prisoner, but in appearance to offer terms; and whose men were 
hidden not far off.  By this earl he was conducted to the castle of 
Flint, where his cousin Henry met him, and dropped on his knee as 
if he were still respectful to his sovereign.

'Fair cousin of Lancaster,' said the King, 'you are very welcome' 
(very welcome, no doubt; but he would have been more so, in chains 
or without a head).

'My lord,' replied Henry, 'I am come a little before my time; but, 
with your good pleasure, I will show you the reason.  Your people 
complain with some bitterness, that you have ruled them rigorously 
for two-and-twenty years.  Now, if it please God, I will help you 
to govern them better in future.'

'Fair cousin,' replied the abject King, 'since it pleaseth you, it 
pleaseth me mightily.'

After this, the trumpets sounded, and the King was stuck on a 
wretched horse, and carried prisoner to Chester, where he was made 
to issue a proclamation, calling a Parliament.  From Chester he was 
taken on towards London.  At Lichfield he tried to escape by 
getting out of a window and letting himself down into a garden; it 
was all in vain, however, and he was carried on and shut up in the 
Tower, where no one pitied him, and where the whole people, whose 
patience he had quite tired out, reproached him without mercy.  
Before he got there, it is related, that his very dog left him and 
departed from his side to lick the hand of Henry.

The day before the Parliament met, a deputation went to this 
wrecked King, and told him that he had promised the Earl of 
Northumberland at Conway Castle to resign the crown.  He said he 
was quite ready to do it, and signed a paper in which he renounced 
his authority and absolved his people from their allegiance to him.  
He had so little spirit left that he gave his royal ring to his 
triumphant cousin Henry with his own hand, and said, that if he 
could have had leave to appoint a successor, that same Henry was 
the man of all others whom he would have named.  Next day, the 
Parliament assembled in Westminster Hall, where Henry sat at the 
side of the throne, which was empty and covered with a cloth of 
gold.  The paper just signed by the King was read to the multitude 
amid shouts of joy, which were echoed through all the streets; when 
some of the noise had died away, the King was formally deposed.  
Then Henry arose, and, making the sign of the cross on his forehead 
and breast, challenged the realm of England as his right; the 
archbishops of Canterbury and York seated him on the throne.

The multitude shouted again, and the shouts re-echoed throughout 
all the streets.  No one remembered, now, that Richard the Second 
had ever been the most beautiful, the wisest, and the best of 
princes; and he now made living (to my thinking) a far more sorry 
spectacle in the Tower of London, than Wat Tyler had made, lying 
dead, among the hoofs of the royal horses in Smithfield.

The Poll-tax died with Wat.  The Smiths to the King and Royal 
Family, could make no chains in which the King could hang the 
people's recollection of him; so the Poll-tax was never collected.



CHAPTER XX - ENGLAND UNDER HENRY THE FOURTH, CALLED BOLINGBROKE



DURING the last reign, the preaching of Wickliffe against the pride 
and cunning of the Pope and all his men, had made a great noise in 
England.  Whether the new King wished to be in favour with the 
priests, or whether he hoped, by pretending to be very religious, 
to cheat Heaven itself into the belief that he was not a usurper, I 
don't know.  Both suppositions are likely enough.  It is certain 
that he began his reign by making a strong show against the 
followers of Wickliffe, who were called Lollards, or heretics - 
although his father, John of Gaunt, had been of that way of 
thinking, as he himself had been more than suspected of being.  It 
is no less certain that he first established in England the 
detestable and atrocious custom, brought from abroad, of burning 
those people as a punishment for their opinions.  It was the 
importation into England of one of the practices of what was called 
the Holy Inquisition:  which was the most UNholy and the most 
infamous tribunal that ever disgraced mankind, and made men more 
like demons than followers of Our Saviour.

No real right to the crown, as you know, was in this King.  Edward 
Mortimer, the young Earl of March - who was only eight or nine 
years old, and who was descended from the Duke of Clarence, the 
elder brother of Henry's father - was, by succession, the real heir 
to the throne.  However, the King got his son declared Prince of 
Wales; and, obtaining possession of the young Earl of March and his 
little brother, kept them in confinement (but not severely) in 
Windsor Castle.  He then required the Parliament to decide what was 
to be done with the deposed King, who was quiet enough, and who 
only said that he hoped his cousin Henry would be 'a good lord' to 
him.  The Parliament replied that they would recommend his being 
kept in some secret place where the people could not resort, and 
where his friends could not be admitted to see him.  Henry 
accordingly passed this sentence upon him, and it now began to be 
pretty clear to the nation that Richard the Second would not live 
very long.

It was a noisy Parliament, as it was an unprincipled one, and the 
Lords quarrelled so violently among themselves as to which of them 
had been loyal and which disloyal, and which consistent and which 
inconsistent, that forty gauntlets are said to have been thrown 
upon the floor at one time as challenges to as many battles:  the 
truth being that they were all false and base together, and had 
been, at one time with the old King, and at another time with the 
new one, and seldom true for any length of time to any one.  They 
soon began to plot again.  A conspiracy was formed to invite the 
King to a tournament at Oxford, and then to take him by surprise 
and kill him.  This murderous enterprise, which was agreed upon at 
secret meetings in the house of the Abbot of Westminster, was 
betrayed by the Earl of Rutland - one of the conspirators.  The 
King, instead of going to the tournament or staying at Windsor 
(where the conspirators suddenly went, on finding themselves 
discovered, with the hope of seizing him), retired to London, 
proclaimed them all traitors, and advanced upon them with a great 
force.  They retired into the west of England, proclaiming Richard 
King; but, the people rose against them, and they were all slain.  
Their treason hastened the death of the deposed monarch.  Whether 
he was killed by hired assassins, or whether he was starved to 
death, or whether he refused food on hearing of his brothers being 
killed (who were in that plot), is very doubtful.  He met his death 
somehow; and his body was publicly shown at St. Paul's Cathedral 
with only the lower part of the face uncovered.  I can scarcely 
doubt that he was killed by the King's orders.

The French wife of the miserable Richard was now only ten years 
old; and, when her father, Charles of France, heard of her 
misfortunes and of her lonely condition in England, he went mad:  
as he had several times done before, during the last five or six 
years.  The French Dukes of Burgundy and Bourbon took up the poor 
girl's cause, without caring much about it, but on the chance of 
getting something out of England.  The people of Bordeaux, who had 
a sort of superstitious attachment to the memory of Richard, 
because he was born there, swore by the Lord that he had been the 
best man in all his kingdom - which was going rather far - and 
promised to do great things against the English.  Nevertheless, 
when they came to consider that they, and the whole people of 
France, were ruined by their own nobles, and that the English rule 
was much the better of the two, they cooled down again; and the two 
dukes, although they were very great men, could do nothing without 
them.  Then, began negotiations between France and England for the 
sending home to Paris of the poor little Queen with all her jewels 
and her fortune of two hundred thousand francs in gold.  The King 
was quite willing to restore the young lady, and even the jewels; 
but he said he really could not part with the money.  So, at last 
she was safely deposited at Paris without her fortune, and then the 
Duke of Burgundy (who was cousin to the French King) began to 
quarrel with the Duke of Orleans (who was brother to the French 
King) about the whole matter; and those two dukes made France even 
more wretched than ever.

As the idea of conquering Scotland was still popular at home, the 
King marched to the river Tyne and demanded homage of the King of 
that country.  This being refused, he advanced to Edinburgh, but 
did little there; for, his army being in want of provisions, and 
the Scotch being very careful to hold him in check without giving 
battle, he was obliged to retire.  It is to his immortal honour 
that in this sally he burnt no villages and slaughtered no people, 
but was particularly careful that his army should be merciful and 
harmless.  It was a great example in those ruthless times.

A war among the border people of England and Scotland went on for 
twelve months, and then the Earl of Northumberland, the nobleman 
who had helped Henry to the crown, began to rebel against him - 
probably because nothing that Henry could do for him would satisfy 
his extravagant expectations.  There was a certain Welsh gentleman, 
named OWEN GLENDOWER, who had been a student in one of the Inns of 
Court, and had afterwards been in the service of the late King, 
whose Welsh property was taken from him by a powerful lord related 
to the present King, who was his neighbour.  Appealing for redress, 
and getting none, he took up arms, was made an outlaw, and declared 
himself sovereign of Wales.  He pretended to be a magician; and not 
only were the Welsh people stupid enough to believe him, but, even 
Henry believed him too; for, making three expeditions into Wales, 
and being three times driven back by the wildness of the country, 
the bad weather, and the skill of Glendower, he thought he was 
defeated by the Welshman's magic arts.  However, he took Lord Grey 
and Sir Edmund Mortimer, prisoners, and allowed the relatives of 
Lord Grey to ransom him, but would not extend such favour to Sir 
Edmund Mortimer.  Now, Henry Percy, called HOTSPUR, son of the Earl 
of Northumberland, who was married to Mortimer's sister, is 
supposed to have taken offence at this; and, therefore, in 
conjunction with his father and some others, to have joined Owen 
Glendower, and risen against Henry.  It is by no means clear that 
this was the real cause of the conspiracy; but perhaps it was made 
the pretext.  It was formed, and was very powerful; including 
SCROOP, Archbishop of York, and the EARL OF DOUGLAS, a powerful and 
brave Scottish nobleman.  The King was prompt and active, and the 
two armies met at Shrewsbury.

There were about fourteen thousand men in each.  The old Earl of 
Northumberland being sick, the rebel forces were led by his son.  
The King wore plain armour to deceive the enemy; and four noblemen, 
with the same object, wore the royal arms.  The rebel charge was so 
furious, that every one of those gentlemen was killed, the royal 
standard was beaten down, and the young Prince of Wales was 
severely wounded in the face.  But he was one of the bravest and 
best soldiers that ever lived, and he fought so well, and the 
King's troops were so encouraged by his bold example, that they 
rallied immediately, and cut the enemy's forces all to pieces.  
Hotspur was killed by an arrow in the brain, and the rout was so 
complete that the whole rebellion was struck down by this one blow.  
The Earl of Northumberland surrendered himself soon after hearing 
of the death of his son, and received a pardon for all his 
offences.

There were some lingerings of rebellion yet:  Owen Glendower being 
retired to Wales, and a preposterous story being spread among the 
ignorant people that King Richard was still alive.  How they could 
have believed such nonsense it is difficult to imagine; but they 
certainly did suppose that the Court fool of the late King, who was 
something like him, was he, himself; so that it seemed as if, after 
giving so much trouble to the country in his life, he was still to 
trouble it after his death.  This was not the worst.  The young 
Earl of March and his brother were stolen out of Windsor Castle.  
Being retaken, and being found to have been spirited away by one 
Lady Spencer, she accused her own brother, that Earl of Rutland who 
was in the former conspiracy and was now Duke of York, of being in 
the plot.  For this he was ruined in fortune, though not put to 
death; and then another plot arose among the old Earl of 
Northumberland, some other lords, and that same Scroop, Archbishop 
of York, who was with the rebels before.  These conspirators caused 
a writing to be posted on the church doors, accusing the King of a 
variety of crimes; but, the King being eager and vigilant to oppose 
them, they were all taken, and the Archbishop was executed.  This 
was the first time that a great churchman had been slain by the law 
in England; but the King was resolved that it should be done, and 
done it was.

The next most remarkable event of this time was the seizure, by 
Henry, of the heir to the Scottish throne - James, a boy of nine 
years old.  He had been put aboard-ship by his father, the Scottish 
King Robert, to save him from the designs of his uncle, when, on 
his way to France, he was accidentally taken by some English 
cruisers.  He remained a prisoner in England for nineteen years, 
and became in his prison a student and a famous poet.

With the exception of occasional troubles with the Welsh and with 
the French, the rest of King Henry's reign was quiet enough.  But, 
the King was far from happy, and probably was troubled in his 
conscience by knowing that he had usurped the crown, and had 
occasioned the death of his miserable cousin.  The Prince of Wales, 
though brave and generous, is said to have been wild and 
dissipated, and even to have drawn his sword on GASCOIGNE, the 
Chief Justice of the King's Bench, because he was firm in dealing 
impartially with one of his dissolute companions.  Upon this the 
Chief Justice is said to have ordered him immediately to prison; 
the Prince of Wales is said to have submitted with a good grace; 
and the King is said to have exclaimed, 'Happy is the monarch who 
has so just a judge, and a son so willing to obey the laws.'  This 
is all very doubtful, and so is another story (of which Shakespeare 
has made beautiful use), that the Prince once took the crown out of 
his father's chamber as he was sleeping, and tried it on his own 
head.

The King's health sank more and more, and he became subject to 
violent eruptions on the face and to bad epileptic fits, and his 
spirits sank every day.  At last, as he was praying before the 
shrine of St. Edward at Westminster Abbey, he was seized with a 
terrible fit, and was carried into the Abbot's chamber, where he 
presently died.  It had been foretold that he would die at 
Jerusalem, which certainly is not, and never was, Westminster.  
But, as the Abbot's room had long been called the Jerusalem 
chamber, people said it was all the same thing, and were quite 
satisfied with the prediction.

The King died on the 20th of March, 1413, in the forty-seventh year 
of his age, and the fourteenth of his reign.  He was buried in 
Canterbury Cathedral.  He had been twice married, and had, by his 
first wife, a family of four sons and two daughters.  Considering 
his duplicity before he came to the throne, his unjust seizure of 
it, and above all, his making that monstrous law for the burning of 
what the priests called heretics, he was a reasonably good king, as 
kings went.



CHAPTER XXI - ENGLAND UNDER HENRY THE FIFTH



FIRST PART


THE Prince of Wales began his reign like a generous and honest man.  
He set the young Earl of March free; he restored their estates and 
their honours to the Percy family, who had lost them by their 
rebellion against his father; he ordered the imbecile and 
unfortunate Richard to be honourably buried among the Kings of 
England; and he dismissed all his wild companions, with assurances 
that they should not want, if they would resolve to be steady, 
faithful, and true.

It is much easier to burn men than to burn their opinions; and 
those of the Lollards were spreading every day.  The Lollards were 
represented by the priests - probably falsely for the most part - 
to entertain treasonable designs against the new King; and Henry, 
suffering himself to be worked upon by these representations, 
sacrificed his friend Sir John Oldcastle, the Lord Cobham, to them, 
after trying in vain to convert him by arguments.  He was declared 
guilty, as the head of the sect, and sentenced to the flames; but 
he escaped from the Tower before the day of execution (postponed 
for fifty days by the King himself), and summoned the Lollards to 
meet him near London on a certain day.  So the priests told the 
King, at least.  I doubt whether there was any conspiracy beyond 
such as was got up by their agents.  On the day appointed, instead 
of five-and-twenty thousand men, under the command of Sir John 
Oldcastle, in the meadows of St. Giles, the King found only eighty 
men, and no Sir John at all.  There was, in another place, an 
addle-headed brewer, who had gold trappings to his horses, and a 
pair of gilt spurs in his breast - expecting to be made a knight 
next day by Sir John, and so to gain the right to wear them - but 
there was no Sir John, nor did anybody give information respecting 
him, though the King offered great rewards for such intelligence.  
Thirty of these unfortunate Lollards were hanged and drawn 
immediately, and were then burnt, gallows and all; and the various 
prisons in and around London were crammed full of others.  Some of 
these unfortunate men made various confessions of treasonable 
designs; but, such confessions were easily got, under torture and 
the fear of fire, and are very little to be trusted.  To finish the 
sad story of Sir John Oldcastle at once, I may mention that he 
escaped into Wales, and remained there safely, for four years.  
When discovered by Lord Powis, it is very doubtful if he would have 
been taken alive - so great was the old soldier's bravery - if a 
miserable old woman had not come behind him and broken his legs 
with a stool.  He was carried to London in a horse-litter, was 
fastened by an iron chain to a gibbet, and so roasted to death.

To make the state of France as plain as I can in a few words, I 
should tell you that the Duke of Orleans, and the Duke of Burgundy, 
commonly called 'John without fear,' had had a grand reconciliation 
of their quarrel in the last reign, and had appeared to be quite in 
a heavenly state of mind.  Immediately after which, on a Sunday, in 
the public streets of Paris, the Duke of Orleans was murdered by a 
party of twenty men, set on by the Duke of Burgundy - according to 
his own deliberate confession.  The widow of King Richard had been 
married in France to the eldest son of the Duke of Orleans.  The 
poor mad King was quite powerless to help her, and the Duke of 
Burgundy became the real master of France.  Isabella dying, her 
husband (Duke of Orleans since the death of his father) married the 
daughter of the Count of Armagnac, who, being a much abler man than 
his young son-in-law, headed his party; thence called after him 
Armagnacs.  Thus, France was now in this terrible condition, that 
it had in it the party of the King's son, the Dauphin Louis; the 
party of the Duke of Burgundy, who was the father of the Dauphin's 
ill-used wife; and the party of the Armagnacs; all hating each 
other; all fighting together; all composed of the most depraved 
nobles that the earth has ever known; and all tearing unhappy 
France to pieces.

The late King had watched these dissensions from England, sensible 
(like the French people) that no enemy of France could injure her 
more than her own nobility.  The present King now advanced a claim 
to the French throne.  His demand being, of course, refused, he 
reduced his proposal to a certain large amount of French territory, 
and to demanding the French princess, Catherine, in marriage, with 
a fortune of two millions of golden crowns.  He was offered less 
territory and fewer crowns, and no princess; but he called his 
ambassadors home and prepared for war.  Then, he proposed to take 
the princess with one million of crowns.  The French Court replied 
that he should have the princess with two hundred thousand crowns 
less; he said this would not do (he had never seen the princess in 
his life), and assembled his army at Southampton.  There was a 
short plot at home just at that time, for deposing him, and making 
the Earl of March king; but the conspirators were all speedily 
condemned and executed, and the King embarked for France.

It is dreadful to observe how long a bad example will be followed; 
but, it is encouraging to know that a good example is never thrown 
away.  The King's first act on disembarking at the mouth of the 
river Seine, three miles from Harfleur, was to imitate his father, 
and to proclaim his solemn orders that the lives and property of 
the peaceable inhabitants should be respected on pain of death.  It 
is agreed by French writers, to his lasting renown, that even while 
his soldiers were suffering the greatest distress from want of 
food, these commands were rigidly obeyed.

With an army in all of thirty thousand men, he besieged the town of 
Harfleur both by sea and land for five weeks; at the end of which 
time the town surrendered, and the inhabitants were allowed to 
depart with only fivepence each, and a part of their clothes.  All 
the rest of their possessions was divided amongst the English army.  
But, that army suffered so much, in spite of its successes, from 
disease and privation, that it was already reduced one half.  
Still, the King was determined not to retire until he had struck a 
greater blow.  Therefore, against the advice of all his 
counsellors, he moved on with his little force towards Calais.  
When he came up to the river Somme he was unable to cross, in 
consequence of the fort being fortified; and, as the English moved 
up the left bank of the river looking for a crossing, the French, 
who had broken all the bridges, moved up the right bank, watching 
them, and waiting to attack them when they should try to pass it.  
At last the English found a crossing and got safely over.  The 
French held a council of war at Rouen, resolved to give the English 
battle, and sent heralds to King Henry to know by which road he was 
going.  'By the road that will take me straight to Calais!' said 
the King, and sent them away with a present of a hundred crowns.

The English moved on, until they beheld the French, and then the 
King gave orders to form in line of battle.  The French not coming 
on, the army broke up after remaining in battle array till night, 
and got good rest and refreshment at a neighbouring village.  The 
French were now all lying in another village, through which they 
knew the English must pass.  They were resolved that the English 
should begin the battle.  The English had no means of retreat, if 
their King had any such intention; and so the two armies passed the 
night, close together.

To understand these armies well, you must bear in mind that the 
immense French army had, among its notable persons, almost the 
whole of that wicked nobility, whose debauchery had made France a 
desert; and so besotted were they by pride, and by contempt for the 
common people, that they had scarcely any bowmen (if indeed they 
had any at all) in their whole enormous number:  which, compared 
with the English army, was at least as six to one.  For these proud 
fools had said that the bow was not a fit weapon for knightly 
hands, and that France must be defended by gentlemen only.  We 
shall see, presently, what hand the gentlemen made of it.

Now, on the English side, among the little force, there was a good 
proportion of men who were not gentlemen by any means, but who were 
good stout archers for all that.  Among them, in the morning - 
having slept little at night, while the French were carousing and 
making sure of victory - the King rode, on a grey horse; wearing on 
his head a helmet of shining steel, surmounted by a crown of gold, 
sparkling with precious stones; and bearing over his armour, 
embroidered together, the arms of England and the arms of France.  
The archers looked at the shining helmet and the crown of gold and 
the sparkling jewels, and admired them all; but, what they admired 
most was the King's cheerful face, and his bright blue eye, as he 
told them that, for himself, he had made up his mind to conquer 
there or to die there, and that England should never have a ransom 
to pay for HIM.  There was one brave knight who chanced to say that 
he wished some of the many gallant gentlemen and good soldiers, who 
were then idle at home in England, were there to increase their 
numbers.  But the King told him that, for his part, he did not wish 
for one more man.  'The fewer we have,' said he, 'the greater will 
be the honour we shall win!'  His men, being now all in good heart, 
were refreshed with bread and wine, and heard prayers, and waited 
quietly for the French.  The King waited for the French, because 
they were drawn up thirty deep (the little English force was only 
three deep), on very difficult and heavy ground; and he knew that 
when they moved, there must be confusion among them.

As they did not move, he sent off two parties:- one to lie 
concealed in a wood on the left of the French:  the other, to set 
fire to some houses behind the French after the battle should be 
begun.  This was scarcely done, when three of the proud French 
gentlemen, who were to defend their country without any help from 
the base peasants, came riding out, calling upon the English to 
surrender.  The King warned those gentlemen himself to retire with 
all speed if they cared for their lives, and ordered the English 
banners to advance.  Upon that, Sir Thomas Erpingham, a great 
English general, who commanded the archers, threw his truncheon 
into the air, joyfully, and all the English men, kneeling down upon 
the ground and biting it as if they took possession of the country, 
rose up with a great shout and fell upon the French.

Every archer was furnished with a great stake tipped with iron; and 
his orders were, to thrust this stake into the ground, to discharge 
his arrow, and then to fall back, when the French horsemen came on.  
As the haughty French gentlemen, who were to break the English 
archers and utterly destroy them with their knightly lances, came 
riding up, they were received with such a blinding storm of arrows, 
that they broke and turned.  Horses and men rolled over one 
another, and the confusion was terrific.  Those who rallied and 
charged the archers got among the stakes on slippery and boggy 
ground, and were so bewildered that the English archers - who wore 
no armour, and even took off their leathern coats to be more active 
- cut them to pieces, root and branch.  Only three French horsemen 
got within the stakes, and those were instantly despatched.  All 
this time the dense French army, being in armour, were sinking 
knee-deep into the mire; while the light English archers, half-
naked, were as fresh and active as if they were fighting on a 
marble floor.

But now, the second division of the French coming to the relief of 
the first, closed up in a firm mass; the English, headed by the 
King, attacked them; and the deadliest part of the battle began.  
The King's brother, the Duke of Clarence, was struck down, and 
numbers of the French surrounded him; but, King Henry, standing 
over the body, fought like a lion until they were beaten off.

Presently, came up a band of eighteen French knights, bearing the 
banner of a certain French lord, who had sworn to kill or take the 
English King.  One of them struck him such a blow with a battle-axe 
that he reeled and fell upon his knees; but, his faithful men, 
immediately closing round him, killed every one of those eighteen 
knights, and so that French lord never kept his oath.

The French Duke of Alenon, seeing this, made a desperate charge, 
and cut his way close up to the Royal Standard of England.  He beat 
down the Duke of York, who was standing near it; and, when the King 
came to his rescue, struck off a piece of the crown he wore.  But, 
he never struck another blow in this world; for, even as he was in 
the act of saying who he was, and that he surrendered to the King; 
and even as the King stretched out his hand to give him a safe and 
honourable acceptance of the offer; he fell dead, pierced by 
innumerable wounds.

The death of this nobleman decided the battle.  The third division 
of the French army, which had never struck a blow yet, and which 
was, in itself, more than double the whole English power, broke and 
fled.  At this time of the fight, the English, who as yet had made 
no prisoners, began to take them in immense numbers, and were still 
occupied in doing so, or in killing those who would not surrender, 
when a great noise arose in the rear of the French - their flying 
banners were seen to stop - and King Henry, supposing a great 
reinforcement to have arrived, gave orders that all the prisoners 
should be put to death.  As soon, however, as it was found that the 
noise was only occasioned by a body of plundering peasants, the 
terrible massacre was stopped.

Then King Henry called to him the French herald, and asked him to 
whom the victory belonged.

The herald replied, 'To the King of England.'

'WE have not made this havoc and slaughter,' said the King.  'It is 
the wrath of Heaven on the sins of France.  What is the name of 
that castle yonder?'

The herald answered him, 'My lord, it is the castle of Azincourt.'  
Said the King, 'From henceforth this battle shall be known to 
posterity, by the name of the battle of Azincourt.'

Our English historians have made it Agincourt; but, under that 
name, it will ever be famous in English annals.

The loss upon the French side was enormous.  Three Dukes were 
killed, two more were taken prisoners, seven Counts were killed, 
three more were taken prisoners, and ten thousand knights and 
gentlemen were slain upon the field.  The English loss amounted to 
sixteen hundred men, among whom were the Duke of York and the Earl 
of Suffolk.

War is a dreadful thing; and it is appalling to know how the 
English were obliged, next morning, to kill those prisoners 
mortally wounded, who yet writhed in agony upon the ground; how the 
dead upon the French side were stripped by their own countrymen and 
countrywomen, and afterwards buried in great pits; how the dead 
upon the English side were piled up in a great barn, and how their 
bodies and the barn were all burned together.  It is in such 
things, and in many more much too horrible to relate, that the real 
desolation and wickedness of war consist.  Nothing can make war 
otherwise than horrible.  But the dark side of it was little 
thought of and soon forgotten; and it cast no shade of trouble on 
the English people, except on those who had lost friends or 
relations in the fight.  They welcomed their King home with shouts 
of rejoicing, and plunged into the water to bear him ashore on 
their shoulders, and flocked out in crowds to welcome him in every 
town through which he passed, and hung rich carpets and tapestries 
out of the windows, and strewed the streets with flowers, and made 
the fountains run with wine, as the great field of Agincourt had 
run with blood.


SECOND PART


THAT proud and wicked French nobility who dragged their country to 
destruction, and who were every day and every year regarded with 
deeper hatred and detestation in the hearts of the French people, 
learnt nothing, even from the defeat of Agincourt.  So far from 
uniting against the common enemy, they became, among themselves, 
more violent, more bloody, and more false - if that were possible - 
than they had been before.  The Count of Armagnac persuaded the 
French king to plunder of her treasures Queen Isabella of Bavaria, 
and to make her a prisoner.  She, who had hitherto been the bitter 
enemy of the Duke of Burgundy, proposed to join him, in revenge.  
He carried her off to Troyes, where she proclaimed herself Regent 
of France, and made him her lieutenant.  The Armagnac party were at 
that time possessed of Paris; but, one of the gates of the city 
being secretly opened on a certain night to a party of the duke's 
men, they got into Paris, threw into the prisons all the Armagnacs 
upon whom they could lay their hands, and, a few nights afterwards, 
with the aid of a furious mob of sixty thousand people, broke the 
prisons open, and killed them all.  The former Dauphin was now 
dead, and the King's third son bore the title.  Him, in the height 
of this murderous scene, a French knight hurried out of bed, 
wrapped in a sheet, and bore away to Poitiers.  So, when the 
revengeful Isabella and the Duke of Burgundy entered Paris in 
triumph after the slaughter of their enemies, the Dauphin was 
proclaimed at Poitiers as the real Regent.

King Henry had not been idle since his victory of Agincourt, but 
had repulsed a brave attempt of the French to recover Harfleur; had 
gradually conquered a great part of Normandy; and, at this crisis 
of affairs, took the important town of Rouen, after a siege of half 
a year.  This great loss so alarmed the French, that the Duke of 
Burgundy proposed that a meeting to treat of peace should be held 
between the French and the English kings in a plain by the river 
Seine.  On the appointed day, King Henry appeared there, with his 
two brothers, Clarence and Gloucester, and a thousand men.  The 
unfortunate French King, being more mad than usual that day, could 
not come; but the Queen came, and with her the Princess Catherine:  
who was a very lovely creature, and who made a real impression on 
King Henry, now that he saw her for the first time.  This was the 
most important circumstance that arose out of the meeting.

As if it were impossible for a French nobleman of that time to be 
true to his word of honour in anything, Henry discovered that the 
Duke of Burgundy was, at that very moment, in secret treaty with 
the Dauphin; and he therefore abandoned the negotiation.

The Duke of Burgundy and the Dauphin, each of whom with the best 
reason distrusted the other as a noble ruffian surrounded by a 
party of noble ruffians, were rather at a loss how to proceed after 
this; but, at length they agreed to meet, on a bridge over the 
river Yonne, where it was arranged that there should be two strong 
gates put up, with an empty space between them; and that the Duke 
of Burgundy should come into that space by one gate, with ten men 
only; and that the Dauphin should come into that space by the other 
gate, also with ten men, and no more.

So far the Dauphin kept his word, but no farther.  When the Duke of 
Burgundy was on his knee before him in the act of speaking, one of 
the Dauphin's noble ruffians cut the said duke down with a small 
axe, and others speedily finished him.

It was in vain for the Dauphin to pretend that this base murder was 
not done with his consent; it was too bad, even for France, and 
caused a general horror.  The duke's heir hastened to make a treaty 
with King Henry, and the French Queen engaged that her husband 
should consent to it, whatever it was.  Henry made peace, on 
condition of receiving the Princess Catherine in marriage, and 
being made Regent of France during the rest of the King's lifetime, 
and succeeding to the French crown at his death.  He was soon 
married to the beautiful Princess, and took her proudly home to 
England, where she was crowned with great honour and glory.

This peace was called the Perpetual Peace; we shall soon see how 
long it lasted.  It gave great satisfaction to the French people, 
although they were so poor and miserable, that, at the time of the 
celebration of the Royal marriage, numbers of them were dying with 
starvation, on the dunghills in the streets of Paris.  There was 
some resistance on the part of the Dauphin in some few parts of 
France, but King Henry beat it all down.

And now, with his great possessions in France secured, and his 
beautiful wife to cheer him, and a son born to give him greater 
happiness, all appeared bright before him.  But, in the fulness of 
his triumph and the height of his power, Death came upon him, and 
his day was done.  When he fell ill at Vincennes, and found that he 
could not recover, he was very calm and quiet, and spoke serenely 
to those who wept around his bed.  His wife and child, he said, he 
left to the loving care of his brother the Duke of Bedford, and his 
other faithful nobles.  He gave them his advice that England should 
establish a friendship with the new Duke of Burgundy, and offer him 
the regency of France; that it should not set free the royal 
princes who had been taken at Agincourt; and that, whatever quarrel 
might arise with France, England should never make peace without 
holding Normandy.  Then, he laid down his head, and asked the 
attendant priests to chant the penitential psalms.  Amid which 
solemn sounds, on the thirty-first of August, one thousand four 
hundred and twenty-two, in only the thirty-fourth year of his age 
and the tenth of his reign, King Henry the Fifth passed away.

Slowly and mournfully they carried his embalmed body in a 
procession of great state to Paris, and thence to Rouen where his 
Queen was:  from whom the sad intelligence of his death was 
concealed until he had been dead some days.  Thence, lying on a bed 
of crimson and gold, with a golden crown upon the head, and a 
golden ball and sceptre lying in the nerveless hands, they carried 
it to Calais, with such a great retinue as seemed to dye the road 
black.  The King of Scotland acted as chief mourner, all the Royal 
Household followed, the knights wore black armour and black plumes 
of feathers, crowds of men bore torches, making the night as light 
as day; and the widowed Princess followed last of all.  At Calais 
there was a fleet of ships to bring the funeral host to Dover.  And 
so, by way of London Bridge, where the service for the dead was 
chanted as it passed along, they brought the body to Westminster 
Abbey, and there buried it with great respect.



CHAPTER XXII - ENGLAND UNDER HENRY THE SIXTH



PART THE FIRST


IT had been the wish of the late King, that while his infant son 
KING HENRY THE SIXTH, at this time only nine months old, was under 
age, the Duke of Gloucester should be appointed Regent.  The 
English Parliament, however, preferred to appoint a Council of 
Regency, with the Duke of Bedford at its head:  to be represented, 
in his absence only, by the Duke of Gloucester.  The Parliament 
would seem to have been wise in this, for Gloucester soon showed 
himself to be ambitious and troublesome, and, in the gratification 
of his own personal schemes, gave dangerous offence to the Duke of 
Burgundy, which was with difficulty adjusted.

As that duke declined the Regency of France, it was bestowed by the 
poor French King upon the Duke of Bedford.  But, the French King 
dying within two months, the Dauphin instantly asserted his claim 
to the French throne, and was actually crowned under the title of 
CHARLES THE SEVENTH.  The Duke of Bedford, to be a match for him, 
entered into a friendly league with the Dukes of Burgundy and 
Brittany, and gave them his two sisters in marriage.  War with 
France was immediately renewed, and the Perpetual Peace came to an 
untimely end.

In the first campaign, the English, aided by this alliance, were 
speedily successful.  As Scotland, however, had sent the French 
five thousand men, and might send more, or attack the North of 
England while England was busy with France, it was considered that 
it would be a good thing to offer the Scottish King, James, who had 
been so long imprisoned, his liberty, on his paying forty thousand 
pounds for his board and lodging during nineteen years, and 
engaging to forbid his subjects from serving under the flag of 
France.  It is pleasant to know, not only that the amiable captive 
at last regained his freedom upon these terms, but, that he married 
a noble English lady, with whom he had been long in love, and 
became an excellent King.  I am afraid we have met with some Kings 
in this history, and shall meet with some more, who would have been 
very much the better, and would have left the world much happier, 
if they had been imprisoned nineteen years too.

In the second campaign, the English gained a considerable victory 
at Verneuil, in a battle which was chiefly remarkable, otherwise, 
for their resorting to the odd expedient of tying their baggage-
horses together by the heads and tails, and jumbling them up with 
the baggage, so as to convert them into a sort of live 
fortification - which was found useful to the troops, but which I 
should think was not agreeable to the horses.  For three years 
afterwards very little was done, owing to both sides being too poor 
for war, which is a very expensive entertainment; but, a council 
was then held in Paris, in which it was decided to lay siege to the 
town of Orleans, which was a place of great importance to the 
Dauphin's cause.  An English army of ten thousand men was 
despatched on this service, under the command of the Earl of 
Salisbury, a general of fame.  He being unfortunately killed early 
in the siege, the Earl of Suffolk took his place; under whom 
(reinforced by SIR JOHN FALSTAFF, who brought up four hundred 
waggons laden with salt herrings and other provisions for the 
troops, and, beating off the French who tried to intercept him, 
came victorious out of a hot skirmish, which was afterwards called 
in jest the Battle of the Herrings) the town of Orleans was so 
completely hemmed in, that the besieged proposed to yield it up to 
their countryman the Duke of Burgundy.  The English general, 
however, replied that his English men had won it, so far, by their 
blood and valour, and that his English men must have it.  There 
seemed to be no hope for the town, or for the Dauphin, who was so 
dismayed that he even thought of flying to Scotland or to Spain - 
when a peasant girl rose up and changed the whole state of affairs.

The story of this peasant girl I have now to tell.


PART THE SECOND:  THE STORY OF JOAN OF ARC


IN a remote village among some wild hills in the province of 
Lorraine, there lived a countryman whose name was JACQUES D'ARC.  
He had a daughter, JOAN OF ARC, who was at this time in her 
twentieth year.  She had been a solitary girl from her childhood; 
she had often tended sheep and cattle for whole days where no human 
figure was seen or human voice heard; and she had often knelt, for 
hours together, in the gloomy, empty, little village chapel, 
looking up at the altar and at the dim lamp burning before it, 
until she fancied that she saw shadowy figures standing there, and 
even that she heard them speak to her.  The people in that part of 
France were very ignorant and superstitious, and they had many 
ghostly tales to tell about what they had dreamed, and what they 
saw among the lonely hills when the clouds and the mists were 
resting on them.  So, they easily believed that Joan saw strange 
sights, and they whispered among themselves that angels and spirits 
talked to her.

At last, Joan told her father that she had one day been surprised 
by a great unearthly light, and had afterwards heard a solemn 
voice, which said it was Saint Michael's voice, telling her that 
she was to go and help the Dauphin.  Soon after this (she said), 
Saint Catherine and Saint Margaret had appeared to her with 
sparkling crowns upon their heads, and had encouraged her to be 
virtuous and resolute.  These visions had returned sometimes; but 
the Voices very often; and the voices always said, 'Joan, thou art 
appointed by Heaven to go and help the Dauphin!'  She almost always 
heard them while the chapel bells were ringing.

There is no doubt, now, that Joan believed she saw and heard these 
things.  It is very well known that such delusions are a disease 
which is not by any means uncommon.  It is probable enough that 
there were figures of Saint Michael, and Saint Catherine, and Saint 
Margaret, in the little chapel (where they would be very likely to 
have shining crowns upon their heads), and that they first gave 
Joan the idea of those three personages.  She had long been a 
moping, fanciful girl, and, though she was a very good girl, I dare 
say she was a little vain, and wishful for notoriety.

Her father, something wiser than his neighbours, said, 'I tell 
thee, Joan, it is thy fancy.  Thou hadst better have a kind husband 
to take care of thee, girl, and work to employ thy mind!'  But Joan 
told him in reply, that she had taken a vow never to have a 
husband, and that she must go as Heaven directed her, to help the 
Dauphin.

It happened, unfortunately for her father's persuasions, and most 
unfortunately for the poor girl, too, that a party of the Dauphin's 
enemies found their way into the village while Joan's disorder was 
at this point, and burnt the chapel, and drove out the inhabitants.  
The cruelties she saw committed, touched Joan's heart and made her 
worse.  She said that the voices and the figures were now 
continually with her; that they told her she was the girl who, 
according to an old prophecy, was to deliver France; and she must 
go and help the Dauphin, and must remain with him until he should 
be crowned at Rheims:  and that she must travel a long way to a 
certain lord named BAUDRICOURT, who could and would, bring her into 
the Dauphin's presence.

As her father still said, 'I tell thee, Joan, it is thy fancy,' she 
set off to find out this lord, accompanied by an uncle, a poor 
village wheelwright and cart-maker, who believed in the reality of 
her visions.  They travelled a long way and went on and on, over a 
rough country, full of the Duke of Burgundy's men, and of all kinds 
of robbers and marauders, until they came to where this lord was.

When his servants told him that there was a poor peasant girl named 
Joan of Arc, accompanied by nobody but an old village wheelwright 
and cart-maker, who wished to see him because she was commanded to 
help the Dauphin and save France, Baudricourt burst out a-laughing, 
and bade them send the girl away.  But, he soon heard so much about 
her lingering in the town, and praying in the churches, and seeing 
visions, and doing harm to no one, that he sent for her, and 
questioned her.  As she said the same things after she had been 
well sprinkled with holy water as she had said before the 
sprinkling, Baudricourt began to think there might be something in 
it.  At all events, he thought it worth while to send her on to the 
town of Chinon, where the Dauphin was.  So, he bought her a horse, 
and a sword, and gave her two squires to conduct her.  As the 
Voices had told Joan that she was to wear a man's dress, now, she 
put one on, and girded her sword to her side, and bound spurs to 
her heels, and mounted her horse and rode away with her two 
squires.  As to her uncle the wheelwright, he stood staring at his 
niece in wonder until she was out of sight - as well he might - and 
then went home again.  The best place, too.

Joan and her two squires rode on and on, until they came to Chinon, 
where she was, after some doubt, admitted into the Dauphin's 
presence.  Picking him out immediately from all his court, she told 
him that she came commanded by Heaven to subdue his enemies and 
conduct him to his coronation at Rheims.  She also told him (or he 
pretended so afterwards, to make the greater impression upon his 
soldiers) a number of his secrets known only to himself, and, 
furthermore, she said there was an old, old sword in the cathedral 
of Saint Catherine at Fierbois, marked with five old crosses on the 
blade, which Saint Catherine had ordered her to wear.

Now, nobody knew anything about this old, old sword, but when the 
cathedral came to be examined - which was immediately done - there, 
sure enough, the sword was found!  The Dauphin then required a 
number of grave priests and bishops to give him their opinion 
whether the girl derived her power from good spirits or from evil 
spirits, which they held prodigiously long debates about, in the 
course of which several learned men fell fast asleep and snored 
loudly.  At last, when one gruff old gentleman had said to Joan, 
'What language do your Voices speak?' and when Joan had replied to 
the gruff old gentleman, 'A pleasanter language than yours,' they 
agreed that it was all correct, and that Joan of Arc was inspired 
from Heaven.  This wonderful circumstance put new heart into the 
Dauphin's soldiers when they heard of it, and dispirited the 
English army, who took Joan for a witch.

So Joan mounted horse again, and again rode on and on, until she 
came to Orleans.  But she rode now, as never peasant girl had 
ridden yet.  She rode upon a white war-horse, in a suit of 
glittering armour; with the old, old sword from the cathedral, 
newly burnished, in her belt; with a white flag carried before her, 
upon which were a picture of God, and the words JESUS MARIA.  In 
this splendid state, at the head of a great body of troops 
escorting provisions of all kinds for the starving inhabitants of 
Orleans, she appeared before that beleaguered city.

When the people on the walls beheld her, they cried out 'The Maid 
is come!  The Maid of the Prophecy is come to deliver us!'  And 
this, and the sight of the Maid fighting at the head of their men, 
made the French so bold, and made the English so fearful, that the 
English line of forts was soon broken, the troops and provisions 
were got into the town, and Orleans was saved.

Joan, henceforth called THE MAID OF ORLEANS, remained within the 
walls for a few days, and caused letters to be thrown over, 
ordering Lord Suffolk and his Englishmen to depart from before the 
town according to the will of Heaven.  As the English general very 
positively declined to believe that Joan knew anything about the 
will of Heaven (which did not mend the matter with his soldiers, 
for they stupidly said if she were not inspired she was a witch, 
and it was of no use to fight against a witch), she mounted her 
white war-horse again, and ordered her white banner to advance.

The besiegers held the bridge, and some strong towers upon the 
bridge; and here the Maid of Orleans attacked them.  The fight was 
fourteen hours long.  She planted a scaling ladder with her own 
hands, and mounted a tower wall, but was struck by an English arrow 
in the neck, and fell into the trench.  She was carried away and 
the arrow was taken out, during which operation she screamed and 
cried with the pain, as any other girl might have done; but 
presently she said that the Voices were speaking to her and 
soothing her to rest.  After a while, she got up, and was again 
foremost in the fight.  When the English who had seen her fall and 
supposed her dead, saw this, they were troubled with the strangest 
fears, and some of them cried out that they beheld Saint Michael on 
a white horse (probably Joan herself) fighting for the French.  
They lost the bridge, and lost the towers, and next day set their 
chain of forts on fire, and left the place.

But as Lord Suffolk himself retired no farther than the town of 
Jargeau, which was only a few miles off, the Maid of Orleans 
besieged him there, and he was taken prisoner.  As the white banner 
scaled the wall, she was struck upon the head with a stone, and was 
again tumbled down into the ditch; but, she only cried all the 
more, as she lay there, 'On, on, my countrymen!  And fear nothing, 
for the Lord hath delivered them into our hands!'  After this new 
success of the Maid's, several other fortresses and places which 
had previously held out against the Dauphin were delivered up 
without a battle; and at Patay she defeated the remainder of the 
English army, and set up her victorious white banner on a field 
where twelve hundred Englishmen lay dead.

She now urged the Dauphin (who always kept out of the way when 
there was any fighting) to proceed to Rheims, as the first part of 
her mission was accomplished; and to complete the whole by being 
crowned there.  The Dauphin was in no particular hurry to do this, 
as Rheims was a long way off, and the English and the Duke of 
Burgundy were still strong in the country through which the road 
lay.  However, they set forth, with ten thousand men, and again the 
Maid of Orleans rode on and on, upon her white war-horse, and in 
her shining armour.  Whenever they came to a town which yielded 
readily, the soldiers believed in her; but, whenever they came to a 
town which gave them any trouble, they began to murmur that she was 
an impostor.  The latter was particularly the case at Troyes, which 
finally yielded, however, through the persuasion of one Richard, a 
friar of the place.  Friar Richard was in the old doubt about the 
Maid of Orleans, until he had sprinkled her well with holy water, 
and had also well sprinkled the threshold of the gate by which she 
came into the city.  Finding that it made no change in her or the 
gate, he said, as the other grave old gentlemen had said, that it 
was all right, and became her great ally.

So, at last, by dint of riding on and on, the Maid of Orleans, and 
the Dauphin, and the ten thousand sometimes believing and sometimes 
unbelieving men, came to Rheims.  And in the great cathedral of 
Rheims, the Dauphin actually was crowned Charles the Seventh in a 
great assembly of the people.  Then, the Maid, who with her white 
banner stood beside the King in that hour of his triumph, kneeled 
down upon the pavement at his feet, and said, with tears, that what 
she had been inspired to do, was done, and that the only recompense 
she asked for, was, that she should now have leave to go back to 
her distant home, and her sturdily incredulous father, and her 
first simple escort the village wheelwright and cart-maker.  But 
the King said 'No!' and made her and her family as noble as a King 
could, and settled upon her the income of a Count.

Ah! happy had it been for the Maid of Orleans, if she had resumed 
her rustic dress that day, and had gone home to the little chapel 
and the wild hills, and had forgotten all these things, and had 
been a good man's wife, and had heard no stranger voices than the 
voices of little children!

It was not to be, and she continued helping the King (she did a 
world for him, in alliance with Friar Richard), and trying to 
improve the lives of the coarse soldiers, and leading a religious, 
an unselfish, and a modest life, herself, beyond any doubt.  Still, 
many times she prayed the King to let her go home; and once she 
even took off her bright armour and hung it up in a church, meaning 
never to wear it more.  But, the King always won her back again - 
while she was of any use to him - and so she went on and on and on, 
to her doom.

When the Duke of Bedford, who was a very able man, began to be 
active for England, and, by bringing the war back into France and 
by holding the Duke of Burgundy to his faith, to distress and 
disturb Charles very much, Charles sometimes asked the Maid of 
Orleans what the Voices said about it?  But, the Voices had become 
(very like ordinary voices in perplexed times) contradictory and 
confused, so that now they said one thing, and now said another, 
and the Maid lost credit every day.  Charles marched on Paris, 
which was opposed to him, and attacked the suburb of Saint Honore.  
In this fight, being again struck down into the ditch, she was 
abandoned by the whole army.  She lay unaided among a heap of dead, 
and crawled out how she could.  Then, some of her believers went 
over to an opposition Maid, Catherine of La Rochelle, who said she 
was inspired to tell where there were treasures of buried money - 
though she never did - and then Joan accidentally broke the old, 
old sword, and others said that her power was broken with it.  
Finally, at the siege of Compigne, held by the Duke of Burgundy, 
where she did valiant service, she was basely left alone in a 
retreat, though facing about and fighting to the last; and an 
archer pulled her off her horse.

O the uproar that was made, and the thanksgivings that were sung, 
about the capture of this one poor country-girl!  O the way in 
which she was demanded to be tried for sorcery and heresy, and 
anything else you like, by the Inquisitor-General of France, and by 
this great man, and by that great man, until it is wearisome to 
think of! She was bought at last by the Bishop of Beauvais for ten 
thousand francs, and was shut up in her narrow prison:  plain Joan 
of Arc again, and Maid of Orleans no more.

I should never have done if I were to tell you how they had Joan 
out to examine her, and cross-examine her, and re-examine her, and 
worry her into saying anything and everything; and how all sorts of 
scholars and doctors bestowed their utmost tediousness upon her.  
Sixteen times she was brought out and shut up again, and worried, 
and entrapped, and argued with, until she was heart-sick of the 
dreary business.  On the last occasion of this kind she was brought 
into a burial-place at Rouen, dismally decorated with a scaffold, 
and a stake and faggots, and the executioner, and a pulpit with a 
friar therein, and an awful sermon ready.  It is very affecting to 
know that even at that pass the poor girl honoured the mean vermin 
of a King, who had so used her for his purposes and so abandoned 
her; and, that while she had been regardless of reproaches heaped 
upon herself, she spoke out courageously for him.

It was natural in one so young to hold to life.  To save her life, 
she signed a declaration prepared for her - signed it with a cross, 
for she couldn't write - that all her visions and Voices had come 
from the Devil.  Upon her recanting the past, and protesting that 
she would never wear a man's dress in future, she was condemned to 
imprisonment for life, 'on the bread of sorrow and the water of 
affliction.'

But, on the bread of sorrow and the water of affliction, the 
visions and the Voices soon returned.  It was quite natural that 
they should do so, for that kind of disease is much aggravated by 
fasting, loneliness, and anxiety of mind.  It was not only got out 
of Joan that she considered herself inspired again, but, she was 
taken in a man's dress, which had been left - to entrap her - in 
her prison, and which she put on, in her solitude; perhaps, in 
remembrance of her past glories, perhaps, because the imaginary 
Voices told her.  For this relapse into the sorcery and heresy and 
anything else you like, she was sentenced to be burnt to death.  
And, in the market-place of Rouen, in the hideous dress which the 
monks had invented for such spectacles; with priests and bishops 
sitting in a gallery looking on, though some had the Christian 
grace to go away, unable to endure the infamous scene; this 
shrieking girl - last seen amidst the smoke and fire, holding a 
crucifix between her hands; last heard, calling upon Christ - was 
burnt to ashes.  They threw her ashes into the river Seine; but 
they will rise against her murderers on the last day.

From the moment of her capture, neither the French King nor one 
single man in all his court raised a finger to save her.  It is no 
defence of them that they may have never really believed in her, or 
that they may have won her victories by their skill and bravery.  
The more they pretended to believe in her, the more they had caused 
her to believe in herself; and she had ever been true to them, ever 
brave, ever nobly devoted.  But, it is no wonder, that they, who 
were in all things false to themselves, false to one another, false 
to their country, false to Heaven, false to Earth, should be 
monsters of ingratitude and treachery to a helpless peasant girl.

In the picturesque old town of Rouen, where weeds and grass grow 
high on the cathedral towers, and the venerable Norman streets are 
still warm in the blessed sunlight though the monkish fires that 
once gleamed horribly upon them have long grown cold, there is a 
statue of Joan of Arc, in the scene of her last agony, the square 
to which she has given its present name.  I know some statues of 
modern times - even in the World's metropolis, I think - which 
commemorate less constancy, less earnestness, smaller claims upon 
the world's attention, and much greater impostors.


PART THE THIRD


BAD deeds seldom prosper, happily for mankind; and the English 
cause gained no advantage from the cruel death of Joan of Arc.  For 
a long time, the war went heavily on.  The Duke of Bedford died; 
the alliance with the Duke of Burgundy was broken; and Lord Talbot 
became a great general on the English side in France.  But, two of 
the consequences of wars are, Famine - because the people cannot 
peacefully cultivate the ground - and Pestilence, which comes of 
want, misery, and suffering.  Both these horrors broke out in both 
countries, and lasted for two wretched years.  Then, the war went 
on again, and came by slow degrees to be so badly conducted by the 
English government, that, within twenty years from the execution of 
the Maid of Orleans, of all the great French conquests, the town of 
Calais alone remained in English hands.

While these victories and defeats were taking place in the course 
of time, many strange things happened at home.  The young King, as 
he grew up, proved to be very unlike his great father, and showed 
himself a miserable puny creature.  There was no harm in him - he 
had a great aversion to shedding blood:  which was something - but, 
he was a weak, silly, helpless young man, and a mere shuttlecock to 
the great lordly battledores about the Court.

Of these battledores, Cardinal Beaufort, a relation of the King, 
and the Duke of Gloucester, were at first the most powerful.  The 
Duke of Gloucester had a wife, who was nonsensically accused of 
practising witchcraft to cause the King's death and lead to her 
husband's coming to the throne, he being the next heir.  She was 
charged with having, by the help of a ridiculous old woman named 
Margery (who was called a witch), made a little waxen doll in the 
King's likeness, and put it before a slow fire that it might 
gradually melt away.  It was supposed, in such cases, that the 
death of the person whom the doll was made to represent, was sure 
to happen.  Whether the duchess was as ignorant as the rest of 
them, and really did make such a doll with such an intention, I 
don't know; but, you and I know very well that she might have made 
a thousand dolls, if she had been stupid enough, and might have 
melted them all, without hurting the King or anybody else.  
However, she was tried for it, and so was old Margery, and so was 
one of the duke's chaplains, who was charged with having assisted 
them.  Both he and Margery were put to death, and the duchess, 
after being taken on foot and bearing a lighted candle, three times 
round the City, as a penance, was imprisoned for life.  The duke, 
himself, took all this pretty quietly, and made as little stir 
about the matter as if he were rather glad to be rid of the 
duchess.

But, he was not destined to keep himself out of trouble long.  The 
royal shuttlecock being three-and-twenty, the battledores were very 
anxious to get him married.  The Duke of Gloucester wanted him to 
marry a daughter of the Count of Armagnac; but, the Cardinal and 
the Earl of Suffolk were all for MARGARET, the daughter of the King 
of Sicily, who they knew was a resolute, ambitious woman and would 
govern the King as she chose.  To make friends with this lady, the 
Earl of Suffolk, who went over to arrange the match, consented to 
accept her for the King's wife without any fortune, and even to 
give up the two most valuable possessions England then had in 
France.  So, the marriage was arranged, on terms very advantageous 
to the lady; and Lord Suffolk brought her to England, and she was 
married at Westminster.  On what pretence this queen and her party 
charged the Duke of Gloucester with high treason within a couple of 
years, it is impossible to make out, the matter is so confused; 
but, they pretended that the King's life was in danger, and they 
took the duke prisoner.  A fortnight afterwards, he was found dead 
in bed (they said), and his body was shown to the people, and Lord 
Suffolk came in for the best part of his estates.  You know by this 
time how strangely liable state prisoners were to sudden death.

If Cardinal Beaufort had any hand in this matter, it did him no 
good, for he died within six weeks; thinking it very hard and 
curious - at eighty years old! - that he could not live to be Pope.

This was the time when England had completed her loss of all her 
great French conquests.  The people charged the loss principally 
upon the Earl of Suffolk, now a duke, who had made those easy terms 
about the Royal Marriage, and who, they believed, had even been 
bought by France.  So he was impeached as a traitor, on a great 
number of charges, but chiefly on accusations of having aided the 
French King, and of designing to make his own son King of England.  
The Commons and the people being violent against him, the King was 
made (by his friends) to interpose to save him, by banishing him 
for five years, and proroguing the Parliament.  The duke had much 
ado to escape from a London mob, two thousand strong, who lay in 
wait for him in St. Giles's fields; but, he got down to his own 
estates in Suffolk, and sailed away from Ipswich.  Sailing across 
the Channel, he sent into Calais to know if he might land there; 
but, they kept his boat and men in the harbour, until an English 
ship, carrying a hundred and fifty men and called the Nicholas of 
the Tower, came alongside his little vessel, and ordered him on 
board.  'Welcome, traitor, as men say,' was the captain's grim and 
not very respectful salutation.  He was kept on board, a prisoner, 
for eight-and-forty hours, and then a small boat appeared rowing 
toward the ship.  As this boat came nearer, it was seen to have in 
it a block, a rusty sword, and an executioner in a black mask.  The 
duke was handed down into it, and there his head was cut off with 
six strokes of the rusty sword.  Then, the little boat rowed away 
to Dover beach, where the body was cast out, and left until the 
duchess claimed it.  By whom, high in authority, this murder was 
committed, has never appeared.  No one was ever punished for it.

There now arose in Kent an Irishman, who gave himself the name of 
Mortimer, but whose real name was JACK CADE.  Jack, in imitation of 
Wat Tyler, though he was a very different and inferior sort of man, 
addressed the Kentish men upon their wrongs, occasioned by the bad 
government of England, among so many battledores and such a poor 
shuttlecock; and the Kentish men rose up to the number of twenty 
thousand.  Their place of assembly was Blackheath, where, headed by 
Jack, they put forth two papers, which they called 'The Complaint 
of the Commons of Kent,' and 'The Requests of the Captain of the 
Great Assembly in Kent.'  They then retired to Sevenoaks.  The 
royal army coming up with them here, they beat it and killed their 
general.  Then, Jack dressed himself in the dead general's armour, 
and led his men to London.

Jack passed into the City from Southwark, over the bridge, and 
entered it in triumph, giving the strictest orders to his men not 
to plunder.  Having made a show of his forces there, while the 
citizens looked on quietly, he went back into Southwark in good 
order, and passed the night.  Next day, he came back again, having 
got hold in the meantime of Lord Say, an unpopular nobleman.  Says 
Jack to the Lord Mayor and judges:  'Will you be so good as to make 
a tribunal in Guildhall, and try me this nobleman?'  The court 
being hastily made, he was found guilty, and Jack and his men cut 
his head off on Cornhill.  They also cut off the head of his son-
in-law, and then went back in good order to Southwark again.

But, although the citizens could bear the beheading of an unpopular 
lord, they could not bear to have their houses pillaged.  And it 
did so happen that Jack, after dinner - perhaps he had drunk a 
little too much - began to plunder the house where he lodged; upon 
which, of course, his men began to imitate him.  Wherefore, the 
Londoners took counsel with Lord Scales, who had a thousand 
soldiers in the Tower; and defended London Bridge, and kept Jack 
and his people out.  This advantage gained, it was resolved by 
divers great men to divide Jack's army in the old way, by making a 
great many promises on behalf of the state, that were never 
intended to be performed.  This DID divide them; some of Jack's men 
saying that they ought to take the conditions which were offered, 
and others saying that they ought not, for they were only a snare; 
some going home at once; others staying where they were; and all 
doubting and quarrelling among themselves.

Jack, who was in two minds about fighting or accepting a pardon, 
and who indeed did both, saw at last that there was nothing to 
expect from his men, and that it was very likely some of them would 
deliver him up and get a reward of a thousand marks, which was 
offered for his apprehension.  So, after they had travelled and 
quarrelled all the way from Southwark to Blackheath, and from 
Blackheath to Rochester, he mounted a good horse and galloped away 
into Sussex.  But, there galloped after him, on a better horse, one 
Alexander Iden, who came up with him, had a hard fight with him, 
and killed him.  Jack's head was set aloft on London Bridge, with 
the face looking towards Blackheath, where he had raised his flag; 
and Alexander Iden got the thousand marks.

It is supposed by some, that the Duke of York, who had been removed 
from a high post abroad through the Queen's influence, and sent out 
of the way, to govern Ireland, was at the bottom of this rising of 
Jack and his men, because he wanted to trouble the government.  He 
claimed (though not yet publicly) to have a better right to the 
throne than Henry of Lancaster, as one of the family of the Earl of 
March, whom Henry the Fourth had set aside.  Touching this claim, 
which, being through female relationship, was not according to the 
usual descent, it is enough to say that Henry the Fourth was the 
free choice of the people and the Parliament, and that his family 
had now reigned undisputed for sixty years.  The memory of Henry 
the Fifth was so famous, and the English people loved it so much, 
that the Duke of York's claim would, perhaps, never have been 
thought of (it would have been so hopeless) but for the unfortunate 
circumstance of the present King's being by this time quite an 
idiot, and the country very ill governed.  These two circumstances 
gave the Duke of York a power he could not otherwise have had.

Whether the Duke knew anything of Jack Cade, or not, he came over 
from Ireland while Jack's head was on London Bridge; being secretly 
advised that the Queen was setting up his enemy, the Duke of 
Somerset, against him.  He went to Westminster, at the head of four 
thousand men, and on his knees before the King, represented to him 
the bad state of the country, and petitioned him to summon a 
Parliament to consider it.  This the King promised.  When the 
Parliament was summoned, the Duke of York accused the Duke of 
Somerset, and the Duke of Somerset accused the Duke of York; and, 
both in and out of Parliament, the followers of each party were 
full of violence and hatred towards the other.  At length the Duke 
of York put himself at the head of a large force of his tenants, 
and, in arms, demanded the reformation of the Government.  Being 
shut out of London, he encamped at Dartford, and the royal army 
encamped at Blackheath.  According as either side triumphed, the 
Duke of York was arrested, or the Duke of Somerset was arrested.  
The trouble ended, for the moment, in the Duke of York renewing his 
oath of allegiance, and going in peace to one of his own castles.

Half a year afterwards the Queen gave birth to a son, who was very 
ill received by the people, and not believed to be the son of the 
King.  It shows the Duke of York to have been a moderate man, 
unwilling to involve England in new troubles, that he did not take 
advantage of the general discontent at this time, but really acted 
for the public good.  He was made a member of the cabinet, and the 
King being now so much worse that he could not be carried about and 
shown to the people with any decency, the duke was made Lord 
Protector of the kingdom, until the King should recover, or the 
Prince should come of age.  At the same time the Duke of Somerset 
was committed to the Tower.  So, now the Duke of Somerset was down, 
and the Duke of York was up.  By the end of the year, however, the 
King recovered his memory and some spark of sense; upon which the 
Queen used her power - which recovered with him - to get the 
Protector disgraced, and her favourite released.  So now the Duke 
of York was down, and the Duke of Somerset was up.

These ducal ups and downs gradually separated the whole nation into 
the two parties of York and Lancaster, and led to those terrible 
civil wars long known as the Wars of the Red and White Roses, 
because the red rose was the badge of the House of Lancaster, and 
the white rose was the badge of the House of York.

The Duke of York, joined by some other powerful noblemen of the 
White Rose party, and leading a small army, met the King with 
another small army at St. Alban's, and demanded that the Duke of 
Somerset should be given up.  The poor King, being made to say in 
answer that he would sooner die, was instantly attacked.  The Duke 
of Somerset was killed, and the King himself was wounded in the 
neck, and took refuge in the house of a poor tanner.  Whereupon, 
the Duke of York went to him, led him with great submission to the 
Abbey, and said he was very sorry for what had happened.  Having 
now the King in his possession, he got a Parliament summoned and 
himself once more made Protector, but, only for a few months; for, 
on the King getting a little better again, the Queen and her party 
got him into their possession, and disgraced the Duke once more.  
So, now the Duke of York was down again.

Some of the best men in power, seeing the danger of these constant 
changes, tried even then to prevent the Red and the White Rose 
Wars.  They brought about a great council in London between the two 
parties.  The White Roses assembled in Blackfriars, the Red Roses 
in Whitefriars; and some good priests communicated between them, 
and made the proceedings known at evening to the King and the 
judges.  They ended in a peaceful agreement that there should be no 
more quarrelling; and there was a great royal procession to St. 
Paul's, in which the Queen walked arm-in-arm with her old enemy, 
the Duke of York, to show the people how comfortable they all were.  
This state of peace lasted half a year, when a dispute between the 
Earl of Warwick (one of the Duke's powerful friends) and some of 
the King's servants at Court, led to an attack upon that Earl - who 
was a White Rose - and to a sudden breaking out of all old 
animosities.  So, here were greater ups and downs than ever.

There were even greater ups and downs than these, soon after.  
After various battles, the Duke of York fled to Ireland, and his 
son the Earl of March to Calais, with their friends the Earls of 
Salisbury and Warwick; and a Parliament was held declaring them all 
traitors.  Little the worse for this, the Earl of Warwick presently 
came back, landed in Kent, was joined by the Archbishop of 
Canterbury and other powerful noblemen and gentlemen, engaged the 
King's forces at Northampton, signally defeated them, and took the 
King himself prisoner, who was found in his tent.  Warwick would 
have been glad, I dare say, to have taken the Queen and Prince too, 
but they escaped into Wales and thence into Scotland.

The King was carried by the victorious force straight to London, 
and made to call a new Parliament, which immediately declared that 
the Duke of York and those other noblemen were not traitors, but 
excellent subjects.  Then, back comes the Duke from Ireland at the 
head of five hundred horsemen, rides from London to Westminster, 
and enters the House of Lords.  There, he laid his hand upon the 
cloth of gold which covered the empty throne, as if he had half a 
mind to sit down in it - but he did not.  On the Archbishop of 
Canterbury, asking him if he would visit the King, who was in his 
palace close by, he replied, 'I know no one in this country, my 
lord, who ought not to visit ME.'  None of the lords present spoke 
a single word; so, the duke went out as he had come in, established 
himself royally in the King's palace, and, six days afterwards, 
sent in to the Lords a formal statement of his claim to the throne.  
The lords went to the King on this momentous subject, and after a 
great deal of discussion, in which the judges and the other law 
officers were afraid to give an opinion on either side, the 
question was compromised.  It was agreed that the present King 
should retain the crown for his life, and that it should then pass 
to the Duke of York and his heirs.

But, the resolute Queen, determined on asserting her son's right, 
would hear of no such thing.  She came from Scotland to the north 
of England, where several powerful lords armed in her cause.  The 
Duke of York, for his part, set off with some five thousand men, a 
little time before Christmas Day, one thousand four hundred and 
sixty, to give her battle.  He lodged at Sandal Castle, near 
Wakefield, and the Red Roses defied him to come out on Wakefield 
Green, and fight them then and there.  His generals said, he had 
best wait until his gallant son, the Earl of March, came up with 
his power; but, he was determined to accept the challenge.  He did 
so, in an evil hour.  He was hotly pressed on all sides, two 
thousand of his men lay dead on Wakefield Green, and he himself was 
taken prisoner.  They set him down in mock state on an ant-hill, 
and twisted grass about his head, and pretended to pay court to him 
on their knees, saying, 'O King, without a kingdom, and Prince 
without a people, we hope your gracious Majesty is very well and 
happy!'  They did worse than this; they cut his head off, and 
handed it on a pole to the Queen, who laughed with delight when she 
saw it (you recollect their walking so religiously and comfortably 
to St. Paul's!), and had it fixed, with a paper crown upon its 
head, on the walls of York.  The Earl of Salisbury lost his head, 
too; and the Duke of York's second son, a handsome boy who was 
flying with his tutor over Wakefield Bridge, was stabbed in the 
heart by a murderous, lord - Lord Clifford by name - whose father 
had been killed by the White Roses in the fight at St. Alban's.  
There was awful sacrifice of life in this battle, for no quarter 
was given, and the Queen was wild for revenge.  When men 
unnaturally fight against their own countrymen, they are always 
observed to be more unnaturally cruel and filled with rage than 
they are against any other enemy.

But, Lord Clifford had stabbed the second son of the Duke of York - 
not the first.  The eldest son, Edward Earl of March, was at 
Gloucester; and, vowing vengeance for the death of his father, his 
brother, and their faithful friends, he began to march against the 
Queen.  He had to turn and fight a great body of Welsh and Irish 
first, who worried his advance.  These he defeated in a great fight 
at Mortimer's Cross, near Hereford, where he beheaded a number of 
the Red Roses taken in battle, in retaliation for the beheading of 
the White Roses at Wakefield.  The Queen had the next turn of 
beheading.  Having moved towards London, and falling in, between 
St. Alban's and Barnet, with the Earl of Warwick and the Duke of 
Norfolk, White Roses both, who were there with an army to oppose 
her, and had got the King with them; she defeated them with great 
loss, and struck off the heads of two prisoners of note, who were 
in the King's tent with him, and to whom the King had promised his 
protection.  Her triumph, however, was very short.  She had no 
treasure, and her army subsisted by plunder.  This caused them to 
be hated and dreaded by the people, and particularly by the London 
people, who were wealthy.  As soon as the Londoners heard that 
Edward, Earl of March, united with the Earl of Warwick, was 
advancing towards the city, they refused to send the Queen 
supplies, and made a great rejoicing.

The Queen and her men retreated with all speed, and Edward and 
Warwick came on, greeted with loud acclamations on every side.  The 
courage, beauty, and virtues of young Edward could not be 
sufficiently praised by the whole people.  He rode into London like 
a conqueror, and met with an enthusiastic welcome.  A few days 
afterwards, Lord Falconbridge and the Bishop of Exeter assembled 
the citizens in St. John's Field, Clerkenwell, and asked them if 
they would have Henry of Lancaster for their King?  To this they 
all roared, 'No, no, no!' and 'King Edward!  King Edward!'  Then, 
said those noblemen, would they love and serve young Edward?  To 
this they all cried, 'Yes, yes!' and threw up their caps and 
clapped their hands, and cheered tremendously.

Therefore, it was declared that by joining the Queen and not 
protecting those two prisoners of note, Henry of Lancaster had 
forfeited the crown; and Edward of York was proclaimed King.  He 
made a great speech to the applauding people at Westminster, and 
sat down as sovereign of England on that throne, on the golden 
covering of which his father - worthy of a better fate than the 
bloody axe which cut the thread of so many lives in England, 
through so many years - had laid his hand.



CHAPTER XXIII - ENGLAND UNDER EDWARD THE FOURTH



KING EDWARD THE FOURTH was not quite twenty-one years of age when 
he took that unquiet seat upon the throne of England.  The 
Lancaster party, the Red Roses, were then assembling in great 
numbers near York, and it was necessary to give them battle 
instantly.  But, the stout Earl of Warwick leading for the young 
King, and the young King himself closely following him, and the 
English people crowding round the Royal standard, the White and the 
Red Roses met, on a wild March day when the snow was falling 
heavily, at Towton; and there such a furious battle raged between 
them, that the total loss amounted to forty thousand men - all 
Englishmen, fighting, upon English ground, against one another.  
The young King gained the day, took down the heads of his father 
and brother from the walls of York, and put up the heads of some of 
the most famous noblemen engaged in the battle on the other side.  
Then, he went to London and was crowned with great splendour.

A new Parliament met.  No fewer than one hundred and fifty of the 
principal noblemen and gentlemen on the Lancaster side were 
declared traitors, and the King - who had very little humanity, 
though he was handsome in person and agreeable in manners - 
resolved to do all he could, to pluck up the Red Rose root and 
branch.

Queen Margaret, however, was still active for her young son.  She 
obtained help from Scotland and from Normandy, and took several 
important English castles.  But, Warwick soon retook them; the 
Queen lost all her treasure on board ship in a great storm; and 
both she and her son suffered great misfortunes.  Once, in the 
winter weather, as they were riding through a forest, they were 
attacked and plundered by a party of robbers; and, when they had 
escaped from these men and were passing alone and on foot through a 
thick dark part of the wood, they came, all at once, upon another 
robber.  So the Queen, with a stout heart, took the little Prince 
by the hand, and going straight up to that robber, said to him, 'My 
friend, this is the young son of your lawful King!  I confide him 
to your care.'  The robber was surprised, but took the boy in his 
arms, and faithfully restored him and his mother to their friends.  
In the end, the Queen's soldiers being beaten and dispersed, she 
went abroad again, and kept quiet for the present.

Now, all this time, the deposed King Henry was concealed by a Welsh 
knight, who kept him close in his castle.  But, next year, the 
Lancaster party recovering their spirits, raised a large body of 
men, and called him out of his retirement, to put him at their 
head.  They were joined by some powerful noblemen who had sworn 
fidelity to the new King, but who were ready, as usual, to break 
their oaths, whenever they thought there was anything to be got by 
it.  One of the worst things in the history of the war of the Red 
and White Roses, is the ease with which these noblemen, who should 
have set an example of honour to the people, left either side as 
they took slight offence, or were disappointed in their greedy 
expectations, and joined the other.  Well! Warwick's brother soon 
beat the Lancastrians, and the false noblemen, being taken, were 
beheaded without a moment's loss of time.  The deposed King had a 
narrow escape; three of his servants were taken, and one of them 
bore his cap of estate, which was set with pearls and embroidered 
with two golden crowns.  However, the head to which the cap 
belonged, got safely into Lancashire, and lay pretty quietly there 
(the people in the secret being very true) for more than a year.  
At length, an old monk gave such intelligence as led to Henry's 
being taken while he was sitting at dinner in a place called 
Waddington Hall.  He was immediately sent to London, and met at 
Islington by the Earl of Warwick, by whose directions he was put 
upon a horse, with his legs tied under it, and paraded three times 
round the pillory.  Then, he was carried off to the Tower, where 
they treated him well enough.

The White Rose being so triumphant, the young King abandoned 
himself entirely to pleasure, and led a jovial life.  But, thorns 
were springing up under his bed of roses, as he soon found out.  
For, having been privately married to ELIZABETH WOODVILLE, a young 
widow lady, very beautiful and very captivating; and at last 
resolving to make his secret known, and to declare her his Queen; 
he gave some offence to the Earl of Warwick, who was usually called 
the King-Maker, because of his power and influence, and because of 
his having lent such great help to placing Edward on the throne.  
This offence was not lessened by the jealousy with which the Nevil 
family (the Earl of Warwick's) regarded the promotion of the 
Woodville family.  For, the young Queen was so bent on providing 
for her relations, that she made her father an earl and a great 
officer of state; married her five sisters to young noblemen of the 
highest rank; and provided for her younger brother, a young man of 
twenty, by marrying him to an immensely rich old duchess of eighty.  
The Earl of Warwick took all this pretty graciously for a man of 
his proud temper, until the question arose to whom the King's 
sister, MARGARET, should be married.  The Earl of Warwick said, 'To 
one of the French King's sons,' and was allowed to go over to the 
French King to make friendly proposals for that purpose, and to 
hold all manner of friendly interviews with him.  But, while he was 
so engaged, the Woodville party married the young lady to the Duke 
of Burgundy!  Upon this he came back in great rage and scorn, and 
shut himself up discontented, in his Castle of Middleham.

A reconciliation, though not a very sincere one, was patched up 
between the Earl of Warwick and the King, and lasted until the Earl 
married his daughter, against the King's wishes, to the Duke of 
Clarence.  While the marriage was being celebrated at Calais, the 
people in the north of England, where the influence of the Nevil 
family was strongest, broke out into rebellion; their complaint 
was, that England was oppressed and plundered by the Woodville 
family, whom they demanded to have removed from power.  As they 
were joined by great numbers of people, and as they openly declared 
that they were supported by the Earl of Warwick, the King did not 
know what to do.  At last, as he wrote to the earl beseeching his 
aid, he and his new son-in-law came over to England, and began to 
arrange the business by shutting the King up in Middleham Castle in 
the safe keeping of the Archbishop of York; so England was not only 
in the strange position of having two kings at once, but they were 
both prisoners at the same time.

Even as yet, however, the King-Maker was so far true to the King, 
that he dispersed a new rising of the Lancastrians, took their 
leader prisoner, and brought him to the King, who ordered him to be 
immediately executed.  He presently allowed the King to return to 
London, and there innumerable pledges of forgiveness and friendship 
were exchanged between them, and between the Nevils and the 
Woodvilles; the King's eldest daughter was promised in marriage to 
the heir of the Nevil family; and more friendly oaths were sworn, 
and more friendly promises made, than this book would hold.

They lasted about three months.  At the end of that time, the 
Archbishop of York made a feast for the King, the Earl of Warwick, 
and the Duke of Clarence, at his house, the Moor, in Hertfordshire.  
The King was washing his hands before supper, when some one 
whispered him that a body of a hundred men were lying in ambush 
outside the house.  Whether this were true or untrue, the King took 
fright, mounted his horse, and rode through the dark night to 
Windsor Castle.  Another reconciliation was patched up between him 
and the King-Maker, but it was a short one, and it was the last.  A 
new rising took place in Lincolnshire, and the King marched to 
repress it.  Having done so, he proclaimed that both the Earl of 
Warwick and the Duke of Clarence were traitors, who had secretly 
assisted it, and who had been prepared publicly to join it on the 
following day.  In these dangerous circumstances they both took 
ship and sailed away to the French court.

And here a meeting took place between the Earl of Warwick and his 
old enemy, the Dowager Queen Margaret, through whom his father had 
had his head struck off, and to whom he had been a bitter foe.  
But, now, when he said that he had done with the ungrateful and 
perfidious Edward of York, and that henceforth he devoted himself 
to the restoration of the House of Lancaster, either in the person 
of her husband or of her little son, she embraced him as if he had 
ever been her dearest friend.  She did more than that; she married 
her son to his second daughter, the Lady Anne.  However agreeable 
this marriage was to the new friends, it was very disagreeable to 
the Duke of Clarence, who perceived that his father-in-law, the 
King-Maker, would never make HIM King, now.  So, being but a weak-
minded young traitor, possessed of very little worth or sense, he 
readily listened to an artful court lady sent over for the purpose, 
and promised to turn traitor once more, and go over to his brother, 
King Edward, when a fitting opportunity should come.

The Earl of Warwick, knowing nothing of this, soon redeemed his 
promise to the Dowager Queen Margaret, by invading England and 
landing at Plymouth, where he instantly proclaimed King Henry, and 
summoned all Englishmen between the ages of sixteen and sixty, to 
join his banner.  Then, with his army increasing as he marched 
along, he went northward, and came so near King Edward, who was in 
that part of the country, that Edward had to ride hard for it to 
the coast of Norfolk, and thence to get away in such ships as he 
could find, to Holland.  Thereupon, the triumphant King-Maker and 
his false son-in-law, the Duke of Clarence, went to London, took 
the old King out of the Tower, and walked him in a great procession 
to Saint Paul's Cathedral with the crown upon his head.  This did 
not improve the temper of the Duke of Clarence, who saw himself 
farther off from being King than ever; but he kept his secret, and 
said nothing.  The Nevil family were restored to all their honours 
and glories, and the Woodvilles and the rest were disgraced.  The 
King-Maker, less sanguinary than the King, shed no blood except 
that of the Earl of Worcester, who had been so cruel to the people 
as to have gained the title of the Butcher.  Him they caught hidden 
in a tree, and him they tried and executed.  No other death stained 
the King-Maker's triumph.

To dispute this triumph, back came King Edward again, next year, 
landing at Ravenspur, coming on to York, causing all his men to cry 
'Long live King Henry!' and swearing on the altar, without a blush, 
that he came to lay no claim to the crown.  Now was the time for 
the Duke of Clarence, who ordered his men to assume the White Rose, 
and declare for his brother.  The Marquis of Montague, though the 
Earl of Warwick's brother, also declining to fight against King 
Edward, he went on successfully to London, where the Archbishop of 
York let him into the City, and where the people made great 
demonstrations in his favour.  For this they had four reasons.  
Firstly, there were great numbers of the King's adherents hiding in 
the City and ready to break out; secondly, the King owed them a 
great deal of money, which they could never hope to get if he were 
unsuccessful; thirdly, there was a young prince to inherit the 
crown; and fourthly, the King was gay and handsome, and more 
popular than a better man might have been with the City ladies.  
After a stay of only two days with these worthy supporters, the 
King marched out to Barnet Common, to give the Earl of Warwick 
battle.  And now it was to be seen, for the last time, whether the 
King or the King-Maker was to carry the day.

While the battle was yet pending, the fainthearted Duke of Clarence 
began to repent, and sent over secret messages to his father-in-
law, offering his services in mediation with the King.  But, the 
Earl of Warwick disdainfully rejected them, and replied that 
Clarence was false and perjured, and that he would settle the 
quarrel by the sword.  The battle began at four o'clock in the 
morning and lasted until ten, and during the greater part of the 
time it was fought in a thick mist - absurdly supposed to be raised 
by a magician.  The loss of life was very great, for the hatred was 
strong on both sides.  The King-Maker was defeated, and the King 
triumphed.  Both the Earl of Warwick and his brother were slain, 
and their bodies lay in St. Paul's, for some days, as a spectacle 
to the people.

Margaret's spirit was not broken even by this great blow.  Within 
five days she was in arms again, and raised her standard in Bath, 
whence she set off with her army, to try and join Lord Pembroke, 
who had a force in Wales.  But, the King, coming up with her 
outside the town of Tewkesbury, and ordering his brother, the DUKE 
OF GLOUCESTER, who was a brave soldier, to attack her men, she 
sustained an entire defeat, and was taken prisoner, together with 
her son, now only eighteen years of age.  The conduct of the King 
to this poor youth was worthy of his cruel character.  He ordered 
him to be led into his tent.  'And what,' said he, 'brought YOU to 
England?'  'I came to England,' replied the prisoner, with a spirit 
which a man of spirit might have admired in a captive, 'to recover 
my father's kingdom, which descended to him as his right, and from 
him descends to me, as mine.'  The King, drawing off his iron 
gauntlet, struck him with it in the face; and the Duke of Clarence 
and some other lords, who were there, drew their noble swords, and 
killed him.

His mother survived him, a prisoner, for five years; after her 
ransom by the King of France, she survived for six years more.  
Within three weeks of this murder, Henry died one of those 
convenient sudden deaths which were so common in the Tower; in 
plainer words, he was murdered by the King's order.

Having no particular excitement on his hands after this great 
defeat of the Lancaster party, and being perhaps desirous to get 
rid of some of his fat (for he was now getting too corpulent to be 
handsome), the King thought of making war on France.  As he wanted 
more money for this purpose than the Parliament could give him, 
though they were usually ready enough for war, he invented a new 
way of raising it, by sending for the principal citizens of London, 
and telling them, with a grave face, that he was very much in want 
of cash, and would take it very kind in them if they would lend him 
some.  It being impossible for them safely to refuse, they 
complied, and the moneys thus forced from them were called - no 
doubt to the great amusement of the King and the Court - as if they 
were free gifts, 'Benevolences.'  What with grants from Parliament, 
and what with Benevolences, the King raised an army and passed over 
to Calais.  As nobody wanted war, however, the French King made 
proposals of peace, which were accepted, and a truce was concluded 
for seven long years.  The proceedings between the Kings of France 
and England on this occasion, were very friendly, very splendid, 
and very distrustful.  They finished with a meeting between the two 
Kings, on a temporary bridge over the river Somme, where they 
embraced through two holes in a strong wooden grating like a lion's 
cage, and made several bows and fine speeches to one another.

It was time, now, that the Duke of Clarence should be punished for 
his treacheries; and Fate had his punishment in store.  He was, 
probably, not trusted by the King - for who could trust him who 
knew him! - and he had certainly a powerful opponent in his brother 
Richard, Duke of Gloucester, who, being avaricious and ambitious, 
wanted to marry that widowed daughter of the Earl of Warwick's who 
had been espoused to the deceased young Prince, at Calais.  
Clarence, who wanted all the family wealth for himself, secreted 
this lady, whom Richard found disguised as a servant in the City of 
London, and whom he married; arbitrators appointed by the King, 
then divided the property between the brothers.  This led to ill-
will and mistrust between them.  Clarence's wife dying, and he 
wishing to make another marriage, which was obnoxious to the King, 
his ruin was hurried by that means, too.  At first, the Court 
struck at his retainers and dependents, and accused some of them of 
magic and witchcraft, and similar nonsense.  Successful against 
this small game, it then mounted to the Duke himself, who was 
impeached by his brother the King, in person, on a variety of such 
charges.  He was found guilty, and sentenced to be publicly 
executed.  He never was publicly executed, but he met his death 
somehow, in the Tower, and, no doubt, through some agency of the 
King or his brother Gloucester, or both.  It was supposed at the 
time that he was told to choose the manner of his death, and that 
he chose to be drowned in a butt of Malmsey wine.  I hope the story 
may be true, for it would have been a becoming death for such a 
miserable creature.

The King survived him some five years.  He died in the forty-second 
year of his life, and the twenty-third of his reign.  He had a very 
good capacity and some good points, but he was selfish, careless, 
sensual, and cruel.  He was a favourite with the people for his 
showy manners; and the people were a good example to him in the 
constancy of their attachment.  He was penitent on his death-bed 
for his 'benevolences,' and other extortions, and ordered 
restitution to be made to the people who had suffered from them.  
He also called about his bed the enriched members of the Woodville 
family, and the proud lords whose honours were of older date, and 
endeavoured to reconcile them, for the sake of the peaceful 
succession of his son and the tranquillity of England.



CHAPTER XXIV - ENGLAND UNDER EDWARD THE FIFTH



THE late King's eldest son, the Prince of Wales, called EDWARD 
after him, was only thirteen years of age at his father's death.  
He was at Ludlow Castle with his uncle, the Earl of Rivers.  The 
prince's brother, the Duke of York, only eleven years of age, was 
in London with his mother.  The boldest, most crafty, and most 
dreaded nobleman in England at that time was their uncle RICHARD, 
Duke of Gloucester, and everybody wondered how the two poor boys 
would fare with such an uncle for a friend or a foe.

The Queen, their mother, being exceedingly uneasy about this, was 
anxious that instructions should be sent to Lord Rivers to raise an 
army to escort the young King safely to London.  But, Lord 
Hastings, who was of the Court party opposed to the Woodvilles, and 
who disliked the thought of giving them that power, argued against 
the proposal, and obliged the Queen to be satisfied with an escort 
of two thousand horse.  The Duke of Gloucester did nothing, at 
first, to justify suspicion.  He came from Scotland (where he was 
commanding an army) to York, and was there the first to swear 
allegiance to his nephew.  He then wrote a condoling letter to the 
Queen-Mother, and set off to be present at the coronation in 
London.

Now, the young King, journeying towards London too, with Lord 
Rivers and Lord Gray, came to Stony Stratford, as his uncle came to 
Northampton, about ten miles distant; and when those two lords 
heard that the Duke of Gloucester was so near, they proposed to the 
young King that they should go back and greet him in his name.  The 
boy being very willing that they should do so, they rode off and 
were received with great friendliness, and asked by the Duke of 
Gloucester to stay and dine with him.  In the evening, while they 
were merry together, up came the Duke of Buckingham with three 
hundred horsemen; and next morning the two lords and the two dukes, 
and the three hundred horsemen, rode away together to rejoin the 
King.  Just as they were entering Stony Stratford, the Duke of 
Gloucester, checking his horse, turned suddenly on the two lords, 
charged them with alienating from him the affections of his sweet 
nephew, and caused them to be arrested by the three hundred 
horsemen and taken back.  Then, he and the Duke of Buckingham went 
straight to the King (whom they had now in their power), to whom 
they made a show of kneeling down, and offering great love and 
submission; and then they ordered his attendants to disperse, and 
took him, alone with them, to Northampton.

A few days afterwards they conducted him to London, and lodged him 
in the Bishop's Palace.  But, he did not remain there long; for, 
the Duke of Buckingham with a tender face made a speech expressing 
how anxious he was for the Royal boy's safety, and how much safer 
he would be in the Tower until his coronation, than he could be 
anywhere else.  So, to the Tower he was taken, very carefully, and 
the Duke of Gloucester was named Protector of the State.

Although Gloucester had proceeded thus far with a very smooth 
countenance - and although he was a clever man, fair of speech, and 
not ill-looking, in spite of one of his shoulders being something 
higher than the other - and although he had come into the City 
riding bare-headed at the King's side, and looking very fond of him 
- he had made the King's mother more uneasy yet; and when the Royal 
boy was taken to the Tower, she became so alarmed that she took 
sanctuary in Westminster with her five daughters.

Nor did she do this without reason, for, the Duke of Gloucester, 
finding that the lords who were opposed to the Woodville family 
were faithful to the young King nevertheless, quickly resolved to 
strike a blow for himself.  Accordingly, while those lords met in 
council at the Tower, he and those who were in his interest met in 
separate council at his own residence, Crosby Palace, in 
Bishopsgate Street.  Being at last quite prepared, he one day 
appeared unexpectedly at the council in the Tower, and appeared to 
be very jocular and merry.  He was particularly gay with the Bishop 
of Ely:  praising the strawberries that grew in his garden on 
Holborn Hill, and asking him to have some gathered that he might 
eat them at dinner.  The Bishop, quite proud of the honour, sent 
one of his men to fetch some; and the Duke, still very jocular and 
gay, went out; and the council all said what a very agreeable duke 
he was!  In a little time, however, he came back quite altered - 
not at all jocular - frowning and fierce - and suddenly said, -

'What do those persons deserve who have compassed my destruction; I 
being the King's lawful, as well as natural, protector?'

To this strange question, Lord Hastings replied, that they deserved 
death, whosoever they were.

'Then,' said the Duke, 'I tell you that they are that sorceress my 
brother's wife;' meaning the Queen:  'and that other sorceress, 
Jane Shore.  Who, by witchcraft, have withered my body, and caused 
my arm to shrink as I now show you.'

He then pulled up his sleeve and showed them his arm, which was 
shrunken, it is true, but which had been so, as they all very well 
knew, from the hour of his birth.

Jane Shore, being then the lover of Lord Hastings, as she had 
formerly been of the late King, that lord knew that he himself was 
attacked.  So, he said, in some confusion, 'Certainly, my Lord, if 
they have done this, they be worthy of punishment.'

'If?' said the Duke of Gloucester; 'do you talk to me of ifs?  I 
tell you that they HAVE so done, and I will make it good upon thy 
body, thou traitor!'

With that, he struck the table a great blow with his fist.  This 
was a signal to some of his people outside to cry 'Treason!'  They 
immediately did so, and there was a rush into the chamber of so 
many armed men that it was filled in a moment.

'First,' said the Duke of Gloucester to Lord Hastings, 'I arrest 
thee, traitor!  And let him,' he added to the armed men who took 
him, 'have a priest at once, for by St. Paul I will not dine until 
I have seen his head of!'

Lord Hastings was hurried to the green by the Tower chapel, and 
there beheaded on a log of wood that happened to be lying on the 
ground.  Then, the Duke dined with a good appetite, and after 
dinner summoning the principal citizens to attend him, told them 
that Lord Hastings and the rest had designed to murder both himself 
and the Duke if Buckingham, who stood by his side, if he had not 
providentially discovered their design.  He requested them to be so 
obliging as to inform their fellow-citizens of the truth of what he 
said, and issued a proclamation (prepared and neatly copied out 
beforehand) to the same effect.

On the same day that the Duke did these things in the Tower, Sir 
Richard Ratcliffe, the boldest and most undaunted of his men, went 
down to Pontefract; arrested Lord Rivers, Lord Gray, and two other 
gentlemen; and publicly executed them on the scaffold, without any 
trial, for having intended the Duke's death.  Three days afterwards 
the Duke, not to lose time, went down the river to Westminster in 
his barge, attended by divers bishops, lords, and soldiers, and 
demanded that the Queen should deliver her second son, the Duke of 
York, into his safe keeping.  The Queen, being obliged to comply, 
resigned the child after she had wept over him; and Richard of 
Gloucester placed him with his brother in the Tower.  Then, he 
seized Jane Shore, and, because she had been the lover of the late 
King, confiscated her property, and got her sentenced to do public 
penance in the streets by walking in a scanty dress, with bare 
feet, and carrying a lighted candle, to St. Paul's Cathedral, 
through the most crowded part of the City.

Having now all things ready for his own advancement, he caused a 
friar to preach a sermon at the cross which stood in front of St. 
Paul's Cathedral, in which he dwelt upon the profligate manners of 
the late King, and upon the late shame of Jane Shore, and hinted 
that the princes were not his children.  'Whereas, good people,' 
said the friar, whose name was SHAW, 'my Lord the Protector, the 
noble Duke of Gloucester, that sweet prince, the pattern of all the 
noblest virtues, is the perfect image and express likeness of his 
father.'  There had been a little plot between the Duke and the 
friar, that the Duke should appear in the crowd at this moment, 
when it was expected that the people would cry 'Long live King 
Richard!'  But, either through the friar saying the words too soon, 
or through the Duke's coming too late, the Duke and the words did 
not come together, and the people only laughed, and the friar 
sneaked off ashamed.

The Duke of Buckingham was a better hand at such business than the 
friar, so he went to the Guildhall the next day, and addressed the 
citizens in the Lord Protector's behalf.  A few dirty men, who had 
been hired and stationed there for the purpose, crying when he had 
done, 'God save King Richard!' he made them a great bow, and 
thanked them with all his heart.  Next day, to make an end of it, 
he went with the mayor and some lords and citizens to Bayard 
Castle, by the river, where Richard then was, and read an address, 
humbly entreating him to accept the Crown of England.  Richard, who 
looked down upon them out of a window and pretended to be in great 
uneasiness and alarm, assured them there was nothing he desired 
less, and that his deep affection for his nephews forbade him to 
think of it.  To this the Duke of Buckingham replied, with 
pretended warmth, that the free people of England would never 
submit to his nephew's rule, and that if Richard, who was the 
lawful heir, refused the Crown, why then they must find some one 
else to wear it.  The Duke of Gloucester returned, that since he 
used that strong language, it became his painful duty to think no 
more of himself, and to accept the Crown.

Upon that, the people cheered and dispersed; and the Duke of 
Gloucester and the Duke of Buckingham passed a pleasant evening, 
talking over the play they had just acted with so much success, and 
every word of which they had prepared together.



CHAPTER XXV - ENGLAND UNDER RICHARD THE THIRD



KING RICHARD THE THIRD was up betimes in the morning, and went to 
Westminster Hall.  In the Hall was a marble seat, upon which he sat 
himself down between two great noblemen, and told the people that 
he began the new reign in that place, because the first duty of a 
sovereign was to administer the laws equally to all, and to 
maintain justice.  He then mounted his horse and rode back to the 
City, where he was received by the clergy and the crowd as if he 
really had a right to the throne, and really were a just man.  The 
clergy and the crowd must have been rather ashamed of themselves in 
secret, I think, for being such poor-spirited knaves.

The new King and his Queen were soon crowned with a great deal of 
show and noise, which the people liked very much; and then the King 
set forth on a royal progress through his dominions.  He was 
crowned a second time at York, in order that the people might have 
show and noise enough; and wherever he went was received with 
shouts of rejoicing - from a good many people of strong lungs, who 
were paid to strain their throats in crying, 'God save King 
Richard!'  The plan was so successful that I am told it has been 
imitated since, by other usurpers, in other progresses through 
other dominions.

While he was on this journey, King Richard stayed a week at 
Warwick.  And from Warwick he sent instructions home for one of the 
wickedest murders that ever was done - the murder of the two young 
princes, his nephews, who were shut up in the Tower of London.

Sir Robert Brackenbury was at that time Governor of the Tower.  To 
him, by the hands of a messenger named JOHN GREEN, did King Richard 
send a letter, ordering him by some means to put the two young 
princes to death.  But Sir Robert - I hope because he had children 
of his own, and loved them - sent John Green back again, riding and 
spurring along the dusty roads, with the answer that he could not 
do so horrible a piece of work.  The King, having frowningly 
considered a little, called to him SIR JAMES TYRREL, his master of 
the horse, and to him gave authority to take command of the Tower, 
whenever he would, for twenty-four hours, and to keep all the keys 
of the Tower during that space of time.  Tyrrel, well knowing what 
was wanted, looked about him for two hardened ruffians, and chose 
JOHN DIGHTON, one of his own grooms, and MILES FOREST, who was a 
murderer by trade.  Having secured these two assistants, he went, 
upon a day in August, to the Tower, showed his authority from the 
King, took the command for four-and-twenty hours, and obtained 
possession of the keys.  And when the black night came he went 
creeping, creeping, like a guilty villain as he was, up the dark, 
stone winding stairs, and along the dark stone passages, until he 
came to the door of the room where the two young princes, having 
said their prayers, lay fast asleep, clasped in each other's arms.  
And while he watched and listened at the door, he sent in those 
evil demons, John Dighton and Miles Forest, who smothered the two 
princes with the bed and pillows, and carried their bodies down the 
stairs, and buried them under a great heap of stones at the 
staircase foot.  And when the day came, he gave up the command of 
the Tower, and restored the keys, and hurried away without once 
looking behind him; and Sir Robert Brackenbury went with fear and 
sadness to the princes' room, and found the princes gone for ever.

You know, through all this history, how true it is that traitors 
are never true, and you will not be surprised to learn that the 
Duke of Buckingham soon turned against King Richard, and joined a 
great conspiracy that was formed to dethrone him, and to place the 
crown upon its rightful owner's head.  Richard had meant to keep 
the murder secret; but when he heard through his spies that this 
conspiracy existed, and that many lords and gentlemen drank in 
secret to the healths of the two young princes in the Tower, he 
made it known that they were dead.  The conspirators, though 
thwarted for a moment, soon resolved to set up for the crown 
against the murderous Richard, HENRY Earl of Richmond, grandson of 
Catherine:  that widow of Henry the Fifth who married Owen Tudor.  
And as Henry was of the house of Lancaster, they proposed that he 
should marry the Princess Elizabeth, the eldest daughter of the 
late King, now the heiress of the house of York, and thus by 
uniting the rival families put an end to the fatal wars of the Red 
and White Roses.  All being settled, a time was appointed for Henry 
to come over from Brittany, and for a great rising against Richard 
to take place in several parts of England at the same hour.  On a 
certain day, therefore, in October, the revolt took place; but 
unsuccessfully.  Richard was prepared, Henry was driven back at sea 
by a storm, his followers in England were dispersed, and the Duke 
of Buckingham was taken, and at once beheaded in the market-place 
at Salisbury.

The time of his success was a good time, Richard thought, for 
summoning a Parliament and getting some money.  So, a Parliament 
was called, and it flattered and fawned upon him as much as he 
could possibly desire, and declared him to be the rightful King of 
England, and his only son Edward, then eleven years of age, the 
next heir to the throne.

Richard knew full well that, let the Parliament say what it would, 
the Princess Elizabeth was remembered by people as the heiress of 
the house of York; and having accurate information besides, of its 
being designed by the conspirators to marry her to Henry of 
Richmond, he felt that it would much strengthen him and weaken 
them, to be beforehand with them, and marry her to his son.  With 
this view he went to the Sanctuary at Westminster, where the late 
King's widow and her daughter still were, and besought them to come 
to Court:  where (he swore by anything and everything) they should 
be safely and honourably entertained.  They came, accordingly, but 
had scarcely been at Court a month when his son died suddenly - or 
was poisoned - and his plan was crushed to pieces.

In this extremity, King Richard, always active, thought, 'I must 
make another plan.'  And he made the plan of marrying the Princess 
Elizabeth himself, although she was his niece.  There was one 
difficulty in the way:  his wife, the Queen Anne, was alive.  But, 
he knew (remembering his nephews) how to remove that obstacle, and 
he made love to the Princess Elizabeth, telling her he felt 
perfectly confident that the Queen would die in February.  The 
Princess was not a very scrupulous young lady, for, instead of 
rejecting the murderer of her brothers with scorn and hatred, she 
openly declared she loved him dearly; and, when February came and 
the Queen did not die, she expressed her impatient opinion that she 
was too long about it.  However, King Richard was not so far out in 
his prediction, but, that she died in March - he took good care of 
that - and then this precious pair hoped to be married.  But they 
were disappointed, for the idea of such a marriage was so unpopular 
in the country, that the King's chief counsellors, RATCLIFFE and 
CATESBY, would by no means undertake to propose it, and the King 
was even obliged to declare in public that he had never thought of 
such a thing.

He was, by this time, dreaded and hated by all classes of his 
subjects.  His nobles deserted every day to Henry's side; he dared 
not call another Parliament, lest his crimes should be denounced 
there; and for want of money, he was obliged to get Benevolences 
from the citizens, which exasperated them all against him.  It was 
said too, that, being stricken by his conscience, he dreamed 
frightful dreams, and started up in the night-time, wild with 
terror and remorse.  Active to the last, through all this, he 
issued vigorous proclamations against Henry of Richmond and all his 
followers, when he heard that they were coming against him with a 
Fleet from France; and took the field as fierce and savage as a 
wild boar - the animal represented on his shield.

Henry of Richmond landed with six thousand men at Milford Haven, 
and came on against King Richard, then encamped at Leicester with 
an army twice as great, through North Wales.  On Bosworth Field the 
two armies met; and Richard, looking along Henry's ranks, and 
seeing them crowded with the English nobles who had abandoned him, 
turned pale when he beheld the powerful Lord Stanley and his son 
(whom he had tried hard to retain) among them.  But, he was as 
brave as he was wicked, and plunged into the thickest of the fight.  
He was riding hither and thither, laying about him in all 
directions, when he observed the Earl of Northumberland - one of 
his few great allies - to stand inactive, and the main body of his 
troops to hesitate.  At the same moment, his desperate glance 
caught Henry of Richmond among a little group of his knights.  
Riding hard at him, and crying 'Treason!' he killed his standard-
bearer, fiercely unhorsed another gentleman, and aimed a powerful 
stroke at Henry himself, to cut him down.  But, Sir William Stanley 
parried it as it fell, and before Richard could raise his arm 
again, he was borne down in a press of numbers, unhorsed, and 
killed.  Lord Stanley picked up the crown, all bruised and 
trampled, and stained with blood, and put it upon Richmond's head, 
amid loud and rejoicing cries of 'Long live King Henry!'

That night, a horse was led up to the church of the Grey Friars at 
Leicester; across whose back was tied, like some worthless sack, a 
naked body brought there for burial.  It was the body of the last 
of the Plantagenet line, King Richard the Third, usurper and 
murderer, slain at the battle of Bosworth Field in the thirty-
second year of his age, after a reign of two years.



CHAPTER XXVI - ENGLAND UNDER HENRY THE SEVENTH



KING HENRY THE SEVENTH did not turn out to be as fine a fellow as 
the nobility and people hoped, in the first joy of their 
deliverance from Richard the Third.  He was very cold, crafty, and 
calculating, and would do almost anything for money.  He possessed 
considerable ability, but his chief merit appears to have been that 
he was not cruel when there was nothing to be got by it.

The new King had promised the nobles who had espoused his cause 
that he would marry the Princess Elizabeth.  The first thing he 
did, was, to direct her to be removed from the castle of Sheriff 
Hutton in Yorkshire, where Richard had placed her, and restored to 
the care of her mother in London.  The young Earl of Warwick, 
Edward Plantagenet, son and heir of the late Duke of Clarence, had 
been kept a prisoner in the same old Yorkshire Castle with her.  
This boy, who was now fifteen, the new King placed in the Tower for 
safety.  Then he came to London in great state, and gratified the 
people with a fine procession; on which kind of show he often very 
much relied for keeping them in good humour.  The sports and feasts 
which took place were followed by a terrible fever, called the 
Sweating Sickness; of which great numbers of people died.  Lord 
Mayors and Aldermen are thought to have suffered most from it; 
whether, because they were in the habit of over-eating themselves, 
or because they were very jealous of preserving filth and nuisances 
in the City (as they have been since), I don't know.

The King's coronation was postponed on account of the general ill-
health, and he afterwards deferred his marriage, as if he were not 
very anxious that it should take place:  and, even after that, 
deferred the Queen's coronation so long that he gave offence to the 
York party.  However, he set these things right in the end, by 
hanging some men and seizing on the rich possessions of others; by 
granting more popular pardons to the followers of the late King 
than could, at first, be got from him; and, by employing about his 
Court, some very scrupulous persons who had been employed in the 
previous reign.

As this reign was principally remarkable for two very curious 
impostures which have become famous in history, we will make those 
two stories its principal feature.

There was a priest at Oxford of the name of Simons, who had for a 
pupil a handsome boy named Lambert Simnel, the son of a baker.  
Partly to gratify his own ambitious ends, and partly to carry out 
the designs of a secret party formed against the King, this priest 
declared that his pupil, the boy, was no other than the young Earl 
of Warwick; who (as everybody might have known) was safely locked 
up in the Tower of London.  The priest and the boy went over to 
Ireland; and, at Dublin, enlisted in their cause all ranks of the 
people:  who seem to have been generous enough, but exceedingly 
irrational.  The Earl of Kildare, the governor of Ireland, declared 
that he believed the boy to be what the priest represented; and the 
boy, who had been well tutored by the priest, told them such things 
of his childhood, and gave them so many descriptions of the Royal 
Family, that they were perpetually shouting and hurrahing, and 
drinking his health, and making all kinds of noisy and thirsty 
demonstrations, to express their belief in him.  Nor was this 
feeling confined to Ireland alone, for the Earl of Lincoln - whom 
the late usurper had named as his successor - went over to the 
young Pretender; and, after holding a secret correspondence with 
the Dowager Duchess of Burgundy - the sister of Edward the Fourth, 
who detested the present King and all his race - sailed to Dublin 
with two thousand German soldiers of her providing.  In this 
promising state of the boy's fortunes, he was crowned there, with a 
crown taken off the head of a statue of the Virgin Mary; and was 
then, according to the Irish custom of those days, carried home on 
the shoulders of a big chieftain possessing a great deal more 
strength than sense.  Father Simons, you may be sure, was mighty 
busy at the coronation.

Ten days afterwards, the Germans, and the Irish, and the priest, 
and the boy, and the Earl of Lincoln, all landed in Lancashire to 
invade England.  The King, who had good intelligence of their 
movements, set up his standard at Nottingham, where vast numbers 
resorted to him every day; while the Earl of Lincoln could gain but 
very few.  With his small force he tried to make for the town of 
Newark; but the King's army getting between him and that place, he 
had no choice but to risk a battle at Stoke.  It soon ended in the 
complete destruction of the Pretender's forces, one half of whom 
were killed; among them, the Earl himself.  The priest and the 
baker's boy were taken prisoners.  The priest, after confessing the 
trick, was shut up in prison, where he afterwards died - suddenly 
perhaps.  The boy was taken into the King's kitchen and made a 
turnspit.  He was afterwards raised to the station of one of the 
King's falconers; and so ended this strange imposition.

There seems reason to suspect that the Dowager Queen - always a 
restless and busy woman - had had some share in tutoring the 
baker's son.  The King was very angry with her, whether or no.  He 
seized upon her property, and shut her up in a convent at 
Bermondsey.

One might suppose that the end of this story would have put the 
Irish people on their guard; but they were quite ready to receive a 
second impostor, as they had received the first, and that same 
troublesome Duchess of Burgundy soon gave them the opportunity.  
All of a sudden there appeared at Cork, in a vessel arriving from 
Portugal, a young man of excellent abilities, of very handsome 
appearance and most winning manners, who declared himself to be 
Richard, Duke of York, the second son of King Edward the Fourth.  
'O,' said some, even of those ready Irish believers, 'but surely 
that young Prince was murdered by his uncle in the Tower!' - 'It IS 
supposed so,' said the engaging young man; 'and my brother WAS 
killed in that gloomy prison; but I escaped - it don't matter how, 
at present - and have been wandering about the world for seven long 
years.'  This explanation being quite satisfactory to numbers of 
the Irish people, they began again to shout and to hurrah, and to 
drink his health, and to make the noisy and thirsty demonstrations 
all over again.  And the big chieftain in Dublin began to look out 
for another coronation, and another young King to be carried home 
on his back.

Now, King Henry being then on bad terms with France, the French 
King, Charles the Eighth, saw that, by pretending to believe in the 
handsome young man, he could trouble his enemy sorely.  So, he 
invited him over to the French Court, and appointed him a body-
guard, and treated him in all respects as if he really were the 
Duke of York.  Peace, however, being soon concluded between the two 
Kings, the pretended Duke was turned adrift, and wandered for 
protection to the Duchess of Burgundy.  She, after feigning to 
inquire into the reality of his claims, declared him to be the very 
picture of her dear departed brother; gave him a body-guard at her 
Court, of thirty halberdiers; and called him by the sounding name 
of the White Rose of England.

The leading members of the White Rose party in England sent over an 
agent, named Sir Robert Clifford, to ascertain whether the White 
Rose's claims were good:  the King also sent over his agents to 
inquire into the Rose's history.  The White Roses declared the 
young man to be really the Duke of York; the King declared him to 
be PERKIN WARBECK, the son of a merchant of the city of Tournay, 
who had acquired his knowledge of England, its language and 
manners, from the English merchants who traded in Flanders; it was 
also stated by the Royal agents that he had been in the service of 
Lady Brompton, the wife of an exiled English nobleman, and that the 
Duchess of Burgundy had caused him to be trained and taught, 
expressly for this deception.  The King then required the Archduke 
Philip - who was the sovereign of Burgundy - to banish this new 
Pretender, or to deliver him up; but, as the Archduke replied that 
he could not control the Duchess in her own land, the King, in 
revenge, took the market of English cloth away from Antwerp, and 
prevented all commercial intercourse between the two countries.

He also, by arts and bribes, prevailed on Sir Robert Clifford to 
betray his employers; and he denouncing several famous English 
noblemen as being secretly the friends of Perkin Warbeck, the King 
had three of the foremost executed at once.  Whether he pardoned 
the remainder because they were poor, I do not know; but it is only 
too probable that he refused to pardon one famous nobleman against 
whom the same Clifford soon afterwards informed separately, because 
he was rich.  This was no other than Sir William Stanley, who had 
saved the King's life at the battle of Bosworth Field.  It is very 
doubtful whether his treason amounted to much more than his having 
said, that if he were sure the young man was the Duke of York, he 
would not take arms against him.  Whatever he had done he admitted, 
like an honourable spirit; and he lost his head for it, and the 
covetous King gained all his wealth.

Perkin Warbeck kept quiet for three years; but, as the Flemings 
began to complain heavily of the loss of their trade by the 
stoppage of the Antwerp market on his account, and as it was not 
unlikely that they might even go so far as to take his life, or 
give him up, he found it necessary to do something.  Accordingly he 
made a desperate sally, and landed, with only a few hundred men, on 
the coast of Deal.  But he was soon glad to get back to the place 
from whence he came; for the country people rose against his 
followers, killed a great many, and took a hundred and fifty 
prisoners:  who were all driven to London, tied together with 
ropes, like a team of cattle.  Every one of them was hanged on some 
part or other of the sea-shore; in order, that if any more men 
should come over with Perkin Warbeck, they might see the bodies as 
a warning before they landed.

Then the wary King, by making a treaty of commerce with the 
Flemings, drove Perkin Warbeck out of that country; and, by 
completely gaining over the Irish to his side, deprived him of that 
asylum too.  He wandered away to Scotland, and told his story at 
that Court.  King James the Fourth of Scotland, who was no friend 
to King Henry, and had no reason to be (for King Henry had bribed 
his Scotch lords to betray him more than once; but had never 
succeeded in his plots), gave him a great reception, called him his 
cousin, and gave him in marriage the Lady Catherine Gordon, a 
beautiful and charming creature related to the royal house of 
Stuart.

Alarmed by this successful reappearance of the Pretender, the King 
still undermined, and bought, and bribed, and kept his doings and 
Perkin Warbeck's story in the dark, when he might, one would 
imagine, have rendered the matter clear to all England.  But, for 
all this bribing of the Scotch lords at the Scotch King's Court, he 
could not procure the Pretender to be delivered up to him.  James, 
though not very particular in many respects, would not betray him; 
and the ever-busy Duchess of Burgundy so provided him with arms, 
and good soldiers, and with money besides, that he had soon a 
little army of fifteen hundred men of various nations.  With these, 
and aided by the Scottish King in person, he crossed the border 
into England, and made a proclamation to the people, in which he 
called the King 'Henry Tudor;' offered large rewards to any who 
should take or distress him; and announced himself as King Richard 
the Fourth come to receive the homage of his faithful subjects.  
His faithful subjects, however, cared nothing for him, and hated 
his faithful troops:  who, being of different nations, quarrelled 
also among themselves.  Worse than this, if worse were possible, 
they began to plunder the country; upon which the White Rose said, 
that he would rather lose his rights, than gain them through the 
miseries of the English people.  The Scottish King made a jest of 
his scruples; but they and their whole force went back again 
without fighting a battle.

The worst consequence of this attempt was, that a rising took place 
among the people of Cornwall, who considered themselves too heavily 
taxed to meet the charges of the expected war.  Stimulated by 
Flammock, a lawyer, and Joseph, a blacksmith, and joined by Lord 
Audley and some other country gentlemen, they marched on all the 
way to Deptford Bridge, where they fought a battle with the King's 
army.  They were defeated - though the Cornish men fought with 
great bravery - and the lord was beheaded, and the lawyer and the 
blacksmith were hanged, drawn, and quartered.  The rest were 
pardoned.  The King, who believed every man to be as avaricious as 
himself, and thought that money could settle anything, allowed them 
to make bargains for their liberty with the soldiers who had taken 
them.

Perkin Warbeck, doomed to wander up and down, and never to find 
rest anywhere - a sad fate:  almost a sufficient punishment for an 
imposture, which he seems in time to have half believed himself - 
lost his Scottish refuge through a truce being made between the two 
Kings; and found himself, once more, without a country before him 
in which he could lay his head.  But James (always honourable and 
true to him, alike when he melted down his plate, and even the 
great gold chain he had been used to wear, to pay soldiers in his 
cause; and now, when that cause was lost and hopeless) did not 
conclude the treaty, until he had safely departed out of the 
Scottish dominions.  He, and his beautiful wife, who was faithful 
to him under all reverses, and left her state and home to follow 
his poor fortunes, were put aboard ship with everything necessary 
for their comfort and protection, and sailed for Ireland.

But, the Irish people had had enough of counterfeit Earls of 
Warwick and Dukes of York, for one while; and would give the White 
Rose no aid.  So, the White Rose - encircled by thorns indeed - 
resolved to go with his beautiful wife to Cornwall as a forlorn 
resource, and see what might be made of the Cornish men, who had 
risen so valiantly a little while before, and who had fought so 
bravely at Deptford Bridge.

To Whitsand Bay, in Cornwall, accordingly, came Perkin Warbeck and 
his wife; and the lovely lady he shut up for safety in the Castle 
of St. Michael's Mount, and then marched into Devonshire at the 
head of three thousand Cornishmen.  These were increased to six 
thousand by the time of his arrival in Exeter; but, there the 
people made a stout resistance, and he went on to Taunton, where he 
came in sight of the King's army.  The stout Cornish men, although 
they were few in number, and badly armed, were so bold, that they 
never thought of retreating; but bravely looked forward to a battle 
on the morrow.  Unhappily for them, the man who was possessed of so 
many engaging qualities, and who attracted so many people to his 
side when he had nothing else with which to tempt them, was not as 
brave as they.  In the night, when the two armies lay opposite to 
each other, he mounted a swift horse and fled.  When morning 
dawned, the poor confiding Cornish men, discovering that they had 
no leader, surrendered to the King's power.  Some of them were 
hanged, and the rest were pardoned and went miserably home.

Before the King pursued Perkin Warbeck to the sanctuary of Beaulieu 
in the New Forest, where it was soon known that he had taken 
refuge, he sent a body of horsemen to St. Michael's Mount, to seize 
his wife.  She was soon taken and brought as a captive before the 
King.  But she was so beautiful, and so good, and so devoted to the 
man in whom she believed, that the King regarded her with 
compassion, treated her with great respect, and placed her at 
Court, near the Queen's person.  And many years after Perkin 
Warbeck was no more, and when his strange story had become like a 
nursery tale, SHE was called the White Rose, by the people, in 
remembrance of her beauty.

The sanctuary at Beaulieu was soon surrounded by the King's men; 
and the King, pursuing his usual dark, artful ways, sent pretended 
friends to Perkin Warbeck to persuade him to come out and surrender 
himself.  This he soon did; the King having taken a good look at 
the man of whom he had heard so much - from behind a screen - 
directed him to be well mounted, and to ride behind him at a little 
distance, guarded, but not bound in any way.  So they entered 
London with the King's favourite show - a procession; and some of 
the people hooted as the Pretender rode slowly through the streets 
to the Tower; but the greater part were quiet, and very curious to 
see him.  From the Tower, he was taken to the Palace at 
Westminster, and there lodged like a gentleman, though closely 
watched.  He was examined every now and then as to his imposture; 
but the King was so secret in all he did, that even then he gave it 
a consequence, which it cannot be supposed to have in itself 
deserved.

At last Perkin Warbeck ran away, and took refuge in another 
sanctuary near Richmond in Surrey.  From this he was again 
persuaded to deliver himself up; and, being conveyed to London, he 
stood in the stocks for a whole day, outside Westminster Hall, and 
there read a paper purporting to be his full confession, and 
relating his history as the King's agents had originally described 
it.  He was then shut up in the Tower again, in the company of the 
Earl of Warwick, who had now been there for fourteen years:  ever 
since his removal out of Yorkshire, except when the King had had 
him at Court, and had shown him to the people, to prove the 
imposture of the Baker's boy.  It is but too probable, when we 
consider the crafty character of Henry the Seventh, that these two 
were brought together for a cruel purpose.  A plot was soon 
discovered between them and the keepers, to murder the Governor, 
get possession of the keys, and proclaim Perkin Warbeck as King 
Richard the Fourth.  That there was some such plot, is likely; that 
they were tempted into it, is at least as likely; that the 
unfortunate Earl of Warwick - last male of the Plantagenet line - 
was too unused to the world, and too ignorant and simple to know 
much about it, whatever it was, is perfectly certain; and that it 
was the King's interest to get rid of him, is no less so.  He was 
beheaded on Tower Hill, and Perkin Warbeck was hanged at Tyburn.

Such was the end of the pretended Duke of York, whose shadowy 
history was made more shadowy - and ever will be - by the mystery 
and craft of the King.  If he had turned his great natural 
advantages to a more honest account, he might have lived a happy 
and respected life, even in those days.  But he died upon a gallows 
at Tyburn, leaving the Scottish lady, who had loved him so well, 
kindly protected at the Queen's Court.  After some time she forgot 
her old loves and troubles, as many people do with Time's merciful 
assistance, and married a Welsh gentleman.  Her second husband, SIR 
MATTHEW CRADOC, more honest and more happy than her first, lies 
beside her in a tomb in the old church of Swansea.

The ill-blood between France and England in this reign, arose out 
of the continued plotting of the Duchess of Burgundy, and disputes 
respecting the affairs of Brittany.  The King feigned to be very 
patriotic, indignant, and warlike; but he always contrived so as 
never to make war in reality, and always to make money.  His 
taxation of the people, on pretence of war with France, involved, 
at one time, a very dangerous insurrection, headed by Sir John 
Egremont, and a common man called John a Chambre.  But it was 
subdued by the royal forces, under the command of the Earl of 
Surrey.  The knighted John escaped to the Duchess of Burgundy, who 
was ever ready to receive any one who gave the King trouble; and 
the plain John was hanged at York, in the midst of a number of his 
men, but on a much higher gibbet, as being a greater traitor.  Hung 
high or hung low, however, hanging is much the same to the person 
hung.

Within a year after her marriage, the Queen had given birth to a 
son, who was called Prince Arthur, in remembrance of the old 
British prince of romance and story; and who, when all these events 
had happened, being then in his fifteenth year, was married to 
CATHERINE, the daughter of the Spanish monarch, with great 
rejoicings and bright prospects; but in a very few months he 
sickened and died.  As soon as the King had recovered from his 
grief, he thought it a pity that the fortune of the Spanish 
Princess, amounting to two hundred thousand crowns, should go out 
of the family; and therefore arranged that the young widow should 
marry his second son HENRY, then twelve years of age, when he too 
should be fifteen.  There were objections to this marriage on the 
part of the clergy; but, as the infallible Pope was gained over, 
and, as he MUST be right, that settled the business for the time.  
The King's eldest daughter was provided for, and a long course of 
disturbance was considered to be set at rest, by her being married 
to the Scottish King.

And now the Queen died.  When the King had got over that grief too, 
his mind once more reverted to his darling money for consolation, 
and he thought of marrying the Dowager Queen of Naples, who was 
immensely rich:  but, as it turned out not to be practicable to 
gain the money however practicable it might have been to gain the 
lady, he gave up the idea.  He was not so fond of her but that he 
soon proposed to marry the Dowager Duchess of Savoy; and, soon 
afterwards, the widow of the King of Castile, who was raving mad.  
But he made a money-bargain instead, and married neither.

The Duchess of Burgundy, among the other discontented people to 
whom she had given refuge, had sheltered EDMUND DE LA POLE (younger 
brother of that Earl of Lincoln who was killed at Stoke), now Earl 
of Suffolk.  The King had prevailed upon him to return to the 
marriage of Prince Arthur; but, he soon afterwards went away again; 
and then the King, suspecting a conspiracy, resorted to his 
favourite plan of sending him some treacherous friends, and buying 
of those scoundrels the secrets they disclosed or invented.  Some 
arrests and executions took place in consequence.  In the end, the 
King, on a promise of not taking his life, obtained possession of 
the person of Edmund de la Pole, and shut him up in the Tower.

This was his last enemy.  If he had lived much longer he would have 
made many more among the people, by the grinding exaction to which 
he constantly exposed them, and by the tyrannical acts of his two 
prime favourites in all money-raising matters, EDMUND DUDLEY and 
RICHARD EMPSON.  But Death - the enemy who is not to be bought off 
or deceived, and on whom no money, and no treachery has any effect 
- presented himself at this juncture, and ended the King's reign.  
He died of the gout, on the twenty-second of April, one thousand 
five hundred and nine, and in the fifty-third year of his age, 
after reigning twenty-four years; he was buried in the beautiful 
Chapel of Westminster Abbey, which he had himself founded, and 
which still bears his name.

It was in this reign that the great CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS, on behalf 
of Spain, discovered what was then called The New World.  Great 
wonder, interest, and hope of wealth being awakened in England 
thereby, the King and the merchants of London and Bristol fitted 
out an English expedition for further discoveries in the New World, 
and entrusted it to SEBASTIAN CABOT, of Bristol, the son of a 
Venetian pilot there.  He was very successful in his voyage, and 
gained high reputation, both for himself and England.



CHAPTER XXVII - ENGLAND UNDER HENRY THE EIGHTH, CALLED BLUFF KING 
HAL AND BURLY KING HARRY



PART THE FIRST


WE now come to King Henry the Eighth, whom it has been too much the 
fashion to call 'Bluff King Hal,' and 'Burly King Harry,' and other 
fine names; but whom I shall take the liberty to call, plainly, one 
of the most detestable villains that ever drew breath.  You will be 
able to judge, long before we come to the end of his life, whether 
he deserves the character.

He was just eighteen years of age when he came to the throne.  
People said he was handsome then; but I don't believe it.  He was a 
big, burly, noisy, small-eyed, large-faced, double-chinned, 
swinish-looking fellow in later life (as we know from the 
likenesses of him, painted by the famous HANS HOLBEIN), and it is 
not easy to believe that so bad a character can ever have been 
veiled under a prepossessing appearance.

He was anxious to make himself popular; and the people, who had 
long disliked the late King, were very willing to believe that he 
deserved to be so.  He was extremely fond of show and display, and 
so were they.  Therefore there was great rejoicing when he married 
the Princess Catherine, and when they were both crowned.  And the 
King fought at tournaments and always came off victorious - for the 
courtiers took care of that - and there was a general outcry that 
he was a wonderful man.  Empson, Dudley, and their supporters were 
accused of a variety of crimes they had never committed, instead of 
the offences of which they really had been guilty; and they were 
pilloried, and set upon horses with their faces to the tails, and 
knocked about and beheaded, to the satisfaction of the people, and 
the enrichment of the King.

The Pope, so indefatigable in getting the world into trouble, had 
mixed himself up in a war on the continent of Europe, occasioned by 
the reigning Princes of little quarrelling states in Italy having 
at various times married into other Royal families, and so led to 
THEIR claiming a share in those petty Governments.  The King, who 
discovered that he was very fond of the Pope, sent a herald to the 
King of France, to say that he must not make war upon that holy 
personage, because he was the father of all Christians.  As the 
French King did not mind this relationship in the least, and also 
refused to admit a claim King Henry made to certain lands in 
France, war was declared between the two countries.  Not to perplex 
this story with an account of the tricks and designs of all the 
sovereigns who were engaged in it, it is enough to say that England 
made a blundering alliance with Spain, and got stupidly taken in by 
that country; which made its own terms with France when it could 
and left England in the lurch.  SIR EDWARD HOWARD, a bold admiral, 
son of the Earl of Surrey, distinguished himself by his bravery 
against the French in this business; but, unfortunately, he was 
more brave than wise, for, skimming into the French harbour of 
Brest with only a few row-boats, he attempted (in revenge for the 
defeat and death of SIR THOMAS KNYVETT, another bold English 
admiral) to take some strong French ships, well defended with 
batteries of cannon.  The upshot was, that he was left on board of 
one of them (in consequence of its shooting away from his own 
boat), with not more than about a dozen men, and was thrown into 
the sea and drowned:  though not until he had taken from his breast 
his gold chain and gold whistle, which were the signs of his 
office, and had cast them into the sea to prevent their being made 
a boast of by the enemy.  After this defeat - which was a great 
one, for Sir Edward Howard was a man of valour and fame - the King 
took it into his head to invade France in person; first executing 
that dangerous Earl of Suffolk whom his father had left in the 
Tower, and appointing Queen Catherine to the charge of his kingdom 
in his absence.  He sailed to Calais, where he was joined by 
MAXIMILIAN, Emperor of Germany, who pretended to be his soldier, 
and who took pay in his service:  with a good deal of nonsense of 
that sort, flattering enough to the vanity of a vain blusterer.  
The King might be successful enough in sham fights; but his idea of 
real battles chiefly consisted in pitching silken tents of bright 
colours that were ignominiously blown down by the wind, and in 
making a vast display of gaudy flags and golden curtains.  Fortune, 
however, favoured him better than he deserved; for, after much 
waste of time in tent pitching, flag flying, gold curtaining, and 
other such masquerading, he gave the French battle at a place 
called Guinegate:  where they took such an unaccountable panic, and 
fled with such swiftness, that it was ever afterwards called by the 
English the Battle of Spurs.  Instead of following up his 
advantage, the King, finding that he had had enough of real 
fighting, came home again.

The Scottish King, though nearly related to Henry by marriage, had 
taken part against him in this war.  The Earl of Surrey, as the 
English general, advanced to meet him when he came out of his own 
dominions and crossed the river Tweed.  The two armies came up with 
one another when the Scottish King had also crossed the river Till, 
and was encamped upon the last of the Cheviot Hills, called the 
Hill of Flodden.  Along the plain below it, the English, when the 
hour of battle came, advanced.  The Scottish army, which had been 
drawn up in five great bodies, then came steadily down in perfect 
silence.  So they, in their turn, advanced to meet the English 
army, which came on in one long line; and they attacked it with a 
body of spearmen, under LORD HOME.  At first they had the best of 
it; but the English recovered themselves so bravely, and fought 
with such valour, that, when the Scottish King had almost made his 
way up to the Royal Standard, he was slain, and the whole Scottish 
power routed.  Ten thousand Scottish men lay dead that day on 
Flodden Field; and among them, numbers of the nobility and gentry.  
For a long time afterwards, the Scottish peasantry used to believe 
that their King had not been really killed in this battle, because 
no Englishman had found an iron belt he wore about his body as a 
penance for having been an unnatural and undutiful son.  But, 
whatever became of his belt, the English had his sword and dagger, 
and the ring from his finger, and his body too, covered with 
wounds.  There is no doubt of it; for it was seen and recognised by 
English gentlemen who had known the Scottish King well.

When King Henry was making ready to renew the war in France, the 
French King was contemplating peace.  His queen, dying at this 
time, he proposed, though he was upwards of fifty years old, to 
marry King Henry's sister, the Princess Mary, who, besides being 
only sixteen, was betrothed to the Duke of Suffolk.  As the 
inclinations of young Princesses were not much considered in such 
matters, the marriage was concluded, and the poor girl was escorted 
to France, where she was immediately left as the French King's 
bride, with only one of all her English attendants.  That one was a 
pretty young girl named ANNE BOLEYN, niece of the Earl of Surrey, 
who had been made Duke of Norfolk, after the victory of Flodden 
Field.  Anne Boleyn's is a name to be remembered, as you will 
presently find.

And now the French King, who was very proud of his young wife, was 
preparing for many years of happiness, and she was looking forward, 
I dare say, to many years of misery, when he died within three 
months, and left her a young widow.  The new French monarch, 
FRANCIS THE FIRST, seeing how important it was to his interests 
that she should take for her second husband no one but an 
Englishman, advised her first lover, the Duke of Suffolk, when King 
Henry sent him over to France to fetch her home, to marry her.  The 
Princess being herself so fond of that Duke, as to tell him that he 
must either do so then, or for ever lose her, they were wedded; and 
Henry afterwards forgave them.  In making interest with the King, 
the Duke of Suffolk had addressed his most powerful favourite and 
adviser, THOMAS WOLSEY - a name very famous in history for its rise 
and downfall.

Wolsey was the son of a respectable butcher at Ipswich, in Suffolk 
and received so excellent an education that he became a tutor to 
the family of the Marquis of Dorset, who afterwards got him 
appointed one of the late King's chaplains.  On the accession of 
Henry the Eighth, he was promoted and taken into great favour.  He 
was now Archbishop of York; the Pope had made him a Cardinal 
besides; and whoever wanted influence in England or favour with the 
King - whether he were a foreign monarch or an English nobleman - 
was obliged to make a friend of the great Cardinal Wolsey.

He was a gay man, who could dance and jest, and sing and drink; and 
those were the roads to so much, or rather so little, of a heart as 
King Henry had.  He was wonderfully fond of pomp and glitter, and 
so was the King.  He knew a good deal of the Church learning of 
that time; much of which consisted in finding artful excuses and 
pretences for almost any wrong thing, and in arguing that black was 
white, or any other colour.  This kind of learning pleased the King 
too.  For many such reasons, the Cardinal was high in estimation 
with the King; and, being a man of far greater ability, knew as 
well how to manage him, as a clever keeper may know how to manage a 
wolf or a tiger, or any other cruel and uncertain beast, that may 
turn upon him and tear him any day.  Never had there been seen in 
England such state as my Lord Cardinal kept.  His wealth was 
enormous; equal, it was reckoned, to the riches of the Crown.  His 
palaces were as splendid as the King's, and his retinue was eight 
hundred strong.  He held his Court, dressed out from top to toe in 
flaming scarlet; and his very shoes were golden, set with precious 
stones.  His followers rode on blood horses; while he, with a 
wonderful affectation of humility in the midst of his great 
splendour, ambled on a mule with a red velvet saddle and bridle and 
golden stirrups.

Through the influence of this stately priest, a grand meeting was 
arranged to take place between the French and English Kings in 
France; but on ground belonging to England.  A prodigious show of 
friendship and rejoicing was to be made on the occasion; and 
heralds were sent to proclaim with brazen trumpets through all the 
principal cities of Europe, that, on a certain day, the Kings of 
France and England, as companions and brothers in arms, each 
attended by eighteen followers, would hold a tournament against all 
knights who might choose to come.

CHARLES, the new Emperor of Germany (the old one being dead), 
wanted to prevent too cordial an alliance between these sovereigns, 
and came over to England before the King could repair to the place 
of meeting; and, besides making an agreeable impression upon him, 
secured Wolsey's interest by promising that his influence should 
make him Pope when the next vacancy occurred.  On the day when the 
Emperor left England, the King and all the Court went over to 
Calais, and thence to the place of meeting, between Ardres and 
Guisnes, commonly called the Field of the Cloth of Gold.  Here, all 
manner of expense and prodigality was lavished on the decorations 
of the show; many of the knights and gentlemen being so superbly 
dressed that it was said they carried their whole estates upon 
their shoulders.

There were sham castles, temporary chapels, fountains running wine, 
great cellars full of wine free as water to all comers, silk tents, 
gold lace and foil, gilt lions, and such things without end; and, 
in the midst of all, the rich Cardinal out-shone and out-glittered 
all the noblemen and gentlemen assembled.  After a treaty made 
between the two Kings with as much solemnity as if they had 
intended to keep it, the lists - nine hundred feet long, and three 
hundred and twenty broad - were opened for the tournament; the 
Queens of France and England looking on with great array of lords 
and ladies.  Then, for ten days, the two sovereigns fought five 
combats every day, and always beat their polite adversaries; though 
they DO write that the King of England, being thrown in a wrestle 
one day by the King of France, lost his kingly temper with his 
brother-in-arms, and wanted to make a quarrel of it.  Then, there 
is a great story belonging to this Field of the Cloth of Gold, 
showing how the English were distrustful of the French, and the 
French of the English, until Francis rode alone one morning to 
Henry's tent; and, going in before he was out of bed, told him in 
joke that he was his prisoner; and how Henry jumped out of bed and 
embraced Francis; and how Francis helped Henry to dress, and warmed 
his linen for him; and how Henry gave Francis a splendid jewelled 
collar, and how Francis gave Henry, in return, a costly bracelet.  
All this and a great deal more was so written about, and sung 
about, and talked about at that time (and, indeed, since that time 
too), that the world has had good cause to be sick of it, for ever.

Of course, nothing came of all these fine doings but a speedy 
renewal of the war between England and France, in which the two 
Royal companions and brothers in arms longed very earnestly to 
damage one another.  But, before it broke out again, the Duke of 
Buckingham was shamefully executed on Tower Hill, on the evidence 
of a discharged servant - really for nothing, except the folly of 
having believed in a friar of the name of HOPKINS, who had 
pretended to be a prophet, and who had mumbled and jumbled out some 
nonsense about the Duke's son being destined to be very great in 
the land.  It was believed that the unfortunate Duke had given 
offence to the great Cardinal by expressing his mind freely about 
the expense and absurdity of the whole business of the Field of the 
Cloth of Gold.  At any rate, he was beheaded, as I have said, for 
nothing.  And the people who saw it done were very angry, and cried 
out that it was the work of 'the butcher's son!'

The new war was a short one, though the Earl of Surrey invaded 
France again, and did some injury to that country.  It ended in 
another treaty of peace between the two kingdoms, and in the 
discovery that the Emperor of Germany was not such a good friend to 
England in reality, as he pretended to be.  Neither did he keep his 
promise to Wolsey to make him Pope, though the King urged him.  Two 
Popes died in pretty quick succession; but the foreign priests were 
too much for the Cardinal, and kept him out of the post.  So the 
Cardinal and King together found out that the Emperor of Germany 
was not a man to keep faith with; broke off a projected marriage 
between the King's daughter MARY, Princess of Wales, and that 
sovereign; and began to consider whether it might not be well to 
marry the young lady, either to Francis himself, or to his eldest 
son.

There now arose at Wittemberg, in Germany, the great leader of the 
mighty change in England which is called The Reformation, and which 
set the people free from their slavery to the priests.  This was a 
learned Doctor, named MARTIN LUTHER, who knew all about them, for 
he had been a priest, and even a monk, himself.  The preaching and 
writing of Wickliffe had set a number of men thinking on this 
subject; and Luther, finding one day to his great surprise, that 
there really was a book called the New Testament which the priests 
did not allow to be read, and which contained truths that they 
suppressed, began to be very vigorous against the whole body, from 
the Pope downward.  It happened, while he was yet only beginning 
his vast work of awakening the nation, that an impudent fellow 
named TETZEL, a friar of very bad character, came into his 
neighbourhood selling what were called Indulgences, by wholesale, 
to raise money for beautifying the great Cathedral of St. Peter's, 
at Rome.  Whoever bought an Indulgence of the Pope was supposed to 
buy himself off from the punishment of Heaven for his offences.  
Luther told the people that these Indulgences were worthless bits 
of paper, before God, and that Tetzel and his masters were a crew 
of impostors in selling them.

The King and the Cardinal were mightily indignant at this 
presumption; and the King (with the help of SIR THOMAS MORE, a wise 
man, whom he afterwards repaid by striking off his head) even wrote 
a book about it, with which the Pope was so well pleased that he 
gave the King the title of Defender of the Faith.  The King and the 
Cardinal also issued flaming warnings to the people not to read 
Luther's books, on pain of excommunication.  But they did read them 
for all that; and the rumour of what was in them spread far and 
wide.

When this great change was thus going on, the King began to show 
himself in his truest and worst colours.  Anne Boleyn, the pretty 
little girl who had gone abroad to France with his sister, was by 
this time grown up to be very beautiful, and was one of the ladies 
in attendance on Queen Catherine.  Now, Queen Catherine was no 
longer young or handsome, and it is likely that she was not 
particularly good-tempered; having been always rather melancholy, 
and having been made more so by the deaths of four of her children 
when they were very young.  So, the King fell in love with the fair 
Anne Boleyn, and said to himself, 'How can I be best rid of my own 
troublesome wife whom I am tired of, and marry Anne?'

You recollect that Queen Catherine had been the wife of Henry's 
brother.  What does the King do, after thinking it over, but calls 
his favourite priests about him, and says, O! his mind is in such a 
dreadful state, and he is so frightfully uneasy, because he is 
afraid it was not lawful for him to marry the Queen!  Not one of 
those priests had the courage to hint that it was rather curious he 
had never thought of that before, and that his mind seemed to have 
been in a tolerably jolly condition during a great many years, in 
which he certainly had not fretted himself thin; but, they all 
said, Ah! that was very true, and it was a serious business; and 
perhaps the best way to make it right, would be for his Majesty to 
be divorced!  The King replied, Yes, he thought that would be the 
best way, certainly; so they all went to work.

If I were to relate to you the intrigues and plots that took place 
in the endeavour to get this divorce, you would think the History 
of England the most tiresome book in the world.  So I shall say no 
more, than that after a vast deal of negotiation and evasion, the 
Pope issued a commission to Cardinal Wolsey and CARDINAL CAMPEGGIO 
(whom he sent over from Italy for the purpose), to try the whole 
case in England.  It is supposed - and I think with reason - that 
Wolsey was the Queen's enemy, because she had reproved him for his 
proud and gorgeous manner of life.  But, he did not at first know 
that the King wanted to marry Anne Boleyn; and when he did know it, 
he even went down on his knees, in the endeavour to dissuade him.

The Cardinals opened their court in the Convent of the Black 
Friars, near to where the bridge of that name in London now stands; 
and the King and Queen, that they might be near it, took up their 
lodgings at the adjoining palace of Bridewell, of which nothing now 
remains but a bad prison.  On the opening of the court, when the 
King and Queen were called on to appear, that poor ill-used lady, 
with a dignity and firmness and yet with a womanly affection worthy 
to be always admired, went and kneeled at the King's feet, and said 
that she had come, a stranger, to his dominions; that she had been 
a good and true wife to him for twenty years; and that she could 
acknowledge no power in those Cardinals to try whether she should 
be considered his wife after all that time, or should be put away.  
With that, she got up and left the court, and would never 
afterwards come back to it.

The King pretended to be very much overcome, and said, O! my lords 
and gentlemen, what a good woman she was to be sure, and how 
delighted he would be to live with her unto death, but for that 
terrible uneasiness in his mind which was quite wearing him away!  
So, the case went on, and there was nothing but talk for two 
months.  Then Cardinal Campeggio, who, on behalf of the Pope, 
wanted nothing so much as delay, adjourned it for two more months; 
and before that time was elapsed, the Pope himself adjourned it 
indefinitely, by requiring the King and Queen to come to Rome and 
have it tried there.  But by good luck for the King, word was 
brought to him by some of his people, that they had happened to 
meet at supper, THOMAS CRANMER, a learned Doctor of Cambridge, who 
had proposed to urge the Pope on, by referring the case to all the 
learned doctors and bishops, here and there and everywhere, and 
getting their opinions that the King's marriage was unlawful.  The 
King, who was now in a hurry to marry Anne Boleyn, thought this 
such a good idea, that he sent for Cranmer, post haste, and said to 
LORD ROCHFORT, Anne Boleyn's father, 'Take this learned Doctor down 
to your country-house, and there let him have a good room for a 
study, and no end of books out of which to prove that I may marry 
your daughter.'  Lord Rochfort, not at all reluctant, made the 
learned Doctor as comfortable as he could; and the learned Doctor 
went to work to prove his case.  All this time, the King and Anne 
Boleyn were writing letters to one another almost daily, full of 
impatience to have the case settled; and Anne Boleyn was showing 
herself (as I think) very worthy of the fate which afterwards befel 
her.

It was bad for Cardinal Wolsey that he had left Cranmer to render 
this help.  It was worse for him that he had tried to dissuade the 
King from marrying Anne Boleyn.  Such a servant as he, to such a 
master as Henry, would probably have fallen in any case; but, 
between the hatred of the party of the Queen that was, and the 
hatred of the party of the Queen that was to be, he fell suddenly 
and heavily.  Going down one day to the Court of Chancery, where he 
now presided, he was waited upon by the Dukes of Norfolk and 
Suffolk, who told him that they brought an order to him to resign 
that office, and to withdraw quietly to a house he had at Esher, in 
Surrey.  The Cardinal refusing, they rode off to the King; and next 
day came back with a letter from him, on reading which, the 
Cardinal submitted.  An inventory was made out of all the riches in 
his palace at York Place (now Whitehall), and he went sorrowfully 
up the river, in his barge, to Putney.  An abject man he was, in 
spite of his pride; for being overtaken, riding out of that place 
towards Esher, by one of the King's chamberlains who brought him a 
kind message and a ring, he alighted from his mule, took off his 
cap, and kneeled down in the dirt.  His poor Fool, whom in his 
prosperous days he had always kept in his palace to entertain him, 
cut a far better figure than he; for, when the Cardinal said to the 
chamberlain that he had nothing to send to his lord the King as a 
present, but that jester who was a most excellent one, it took six 
strong yeomen to remove the faithful fool from his master.

The once proud Cardinal was soon further disgraced, and wrote the 
most abject letters to his vile sovereign; who humbled him one day 
and encouraged him the next, according to his humour, until he was 
at last ordered to go and reside in his diocese of York.  He said 
he was too poor; but I don't know how he made that out, for he took 
a hundred and sixty servants with him, and seventy-two cart-loads 
of furniture, food, and wine.  He remained in that part of the 
country for the best part of a year, and showed himself so improved 
by his misfortunes, and was so mild and so conciliating, that he 
won all hearts.  And indeed, even in his proud days, he had done 
some magnificent things for learning and education.  At last, he 
was arrested for high treason; and, coming slowly on his journey 
towards London, got as far as Leicester.  Arriving at Leicester 
Abbey after dark, and very ill, he said - when the monks came out 
at the gate with lighted torches to receive him - that he had come 
to lay his bones among them.  He had indeed; for he was taken to a 
bed, from which he never rose again.  His last words were, 'Had I 
but served God as diligently as I have served the King, He would 
not have given me over, in my grey hairs.  Howbeit, this is my just 
reward for my pains and diligence, not regarding my service to God, 
but only my duty to my prince.'  The news of his death was quickly 
carried to the King, who was amusing himself with archery in the 
garden of the magnificent Palace at Hampton Court, which that very 
Wolsey had presented to him.  The greatest emotion his royal mind 
displayed at the loss of a servant so faithful and so ruined, was a 
particular desire to lay hold of fifteen hundred pounds which the 
Cardinal was reported to have hidden somewhere.

The opinions concerning the divorce, of the learned doctors and 
bishops and others, being at last collected, and being generally in 
the King's favour, were forwarded to the Pope, with an entreaty 
that he would now grant it.  The unfortunate Pope, who was a timid 
man, was half distracted between his fear of his authority being 
set aside in England if he did not do as he was asked, and his 
dread of offending the Emperor of Germany, who was Queen 
Catherine's nephew.  In this state of mind he still evaded and did 
nothing.  Then, THOMAS CROMWELL, who had been one of Wolsey's 
faithful attendants, and had remained so even in his decline, 
advised the King to take the matter into his own hands, and make 
himself the head of the whole Church.  This, the King by various 
artful means, began to do; but he recompensed the clergy by 
allowing them to burn as many people as they pleased, for holding 
Luther's opinions.  You must understand that Sir Thomas More, the 
wise man who had helped the King with his book, had been made 
Chancellor in Wolsey's place.  But, as he was truly attached to the 
Church as it was even in its abuses, he, in this state of things, 
resigned.

Being now quite resolved to get rid of Queen Catherine, and to 
marry Anne Boleyn without more ado, the King made Cranmer 
Archbishop of Canterbury, and directed Queen Catherine to leave the 
Court.  She obeyed; but replied that wherever she went, she was 
Queen of England still, and would remain so, to the last.  The King 
then married Anne Boleyn privately; and the new Archbishop of 
Canterbury, within half a year, declared his marriage with Queen 
Catherine void, and crowned Anne Boleyn Queen.

She might have known that no good could ever come from such wrong, 
and that the corpulent brute who had been so faithless and so cruel 
to his first wife, could be more faithless and more cruel to his 
second.  She might have known that, even when he was in love with 
her, he had been a mean and selfish coward, running away, like a 
frightened cur, from her society and her house, when a dangerous 
sickness broke out in it, and when she might easily have taken it 
and died, as several of the household did.  But, Anne Boleyn 
arrived at all this knowledge too late, and bought it at a dear 
price.  Her bad marriage with a worse man came to its natural end.  
Its natural end was not, as we shall too soon see, a natural death 
for her.



CHAPTER XXVIII - ENGLAND UNDER HENRY THE EIGHTH



PART THE SECOND


THE Pope was thrown into a very angry state of mind when he heard 
of the King's marriage, and fumed exceedingly.  Many of the English 
monks and friars, seeing that their order was in danger, did the 
same; some even declaimed against the King in church before his 
face, and were not to be stopped until he himself roared out 
'Silence!'  The King, not much the worse for this, took it pretty 
quietly; and was very glad when his Queen gave birth to a daughter, 
who was christened ELIZABETH, and declared Princess of Wales as her 
sister Mary had already been.

One of the most atrocious features of this reign was that Henry the 
Eighth was always trimming between the reformed religion and the 
unreformed one; so that the more he quarrelled with the Pope, the 
more of his own subjects he roasted alive for not holding the 
Pope's opinions.  Thus, an unfortunate student named John Frith, 
and a poor simple tailor named Andrew Hewet who loved him very 
much, and said that whatever John Frith believed HE believed, were 
burnt in Smithfield - to show what a capital Christian the King 
was.

But, these were speedily followed by two much greater victims, Sir 
Thomas More, and John Fisher, the Bishop of Rochester.  The latter, 
who was a good and amiable old man, had committed no greater 
offence than believing in Elizabeth Barton, called the Maid of Kent 
- another of those ridiculous women who pretended to be inspired, 
and to make all sorts of heavenly revelations, though they indeed 
uttered nothing but evil nonsense.  For this offence - as it was 
pretended, but really for denying the King to be the supreme Head 
of the Church - he got into trouble, and was put in prison; but, 
even then, he might have been suffered to die naturally (short work 
having been made of executing the Kentish Maid and her principal 
followers), but that the Pope, to spite the King, resolved to make 
him a cardinal.  Upon that the King made a ferocious joke to the 
effect that the Pope might send Fisher a red hat - which is the way 
they make a cardinal - but he should have no head on which to wear 
it; and he was tried with all unfairness and injustice, and 
sentenced to death.  He died like a noble and virtuous old man, and 
left a worthy name behind him.  The King supposed, I dare say, that 
Sir Thomas More would be frightened by this example; but, as he was 
not to be easily terrified, and, thoroughly believing in the Pope, 
had made up his mind that the King was not the rightful Head of the 
Church, he positively refused to say that he was.  For this crime 
he too was tried and sentenced, after having been in prison a whole 
year.  When he was doomed to death, and came away from his trial 
with the edge of the executioner's axe turned towards him - as was 
always done in those times when a state prisoner came to that 
hopeless pass - he bore it quite serenely, and gave his blessing to 
his son, who pressed through the crowd in Westminster Hall and 
kneeled down to receive it.  But, when he got to the Tower Wharf on 
his way back to his prison, and his favourite daughter, MARGARET 
ROPER, a very good woman, rushed through the guards again and 
again, to kiss him and to weep upon his neck, he was overcome at 
last.  He soon recovered, and never more showed any feeling but 
cheerfulness and courage.  When he was going up the steps of the 
scaffold to his death, he said jokingly to the Lieutenant of the 
Tower, observing that they were weak and shook beneath his tread, 
'I pray you, master Lieutenant, see me safe up; and, for my coming 
down, I can shift for myself.'  Also he said to the executioner, 
after he had laid his head upon the block, 'Let me put my beard out 
of the way; for that, at least, has never committed any treason.'  
Then his head was struck off at a blow.  These two executions were 
worthy of King Henry the Eighth.  Sir Thomas More was one of the 
most virtuous men in his dominions, and the Bishop was one of his 
oldest and truest friends.  But to be a friend of that fellow was 
almost as dangerous as to be his wife.

When the news of these two murders got to Rome, the Pope raged 
against the murderer more than ever Pope raged since the world 
began, and prepared a Bull, ordering his subjects to take arms 
against him and dethrone him.  The King took all possible 
precautions to keep that document out of his dominions, and set to 
work in return to suppress a great number of the English 
monasteries and abbeys.

This destruction was begun by a body of commissioners, of whom 
Cromwell (whom the King had taken into great favour) was the head; 
and was carried on through some few years to its entire completion.  
There is no doubt that many of these religious establishments were 
religious in nothing but in name, and were crammed with lazy, 
indolent, and sensual monks.  There is no doubt that they imposed 
upon the people in every possible way; that they had images moved 
by wires, which they pretended were miraculously moved by Heaven; 
that they had among them a whole tun measure full of teeth, all 
purporting to have come out of the head of one saint, who must 
indeed have been a very extraordinary person with that enormous 
allowance of grinders; that they had bits of coal which they said 
had fried Saint Lawrence, and bits of toe-nails which they said 
belonged to other famous saints; penknives, and boots, and girdles, 
which they said belonged to others; and that all these bits of 
rubbish were called Relics, and adored by the ignorant people.  
But, on the other hand, there is no doubt either, that the King's 
officers and men punished the good monks with the bad; did great 
injustice; demolished many beautiful things and many valuable 
libraries; destroyed numbers of paintings, stained glass windows, 
fine pavements, and carvings; and that the whole court were 
ravenously greedy and rapacious for the division of this great 
spoil among them.  The King seems to have grown almost mad in the 
ardour of this pursuit; for he declared Thomas a Becket a traitor, 
though he had been dead so many years, and had his body dug up out 
of his grave.  He must have been as miraculous as the monks 
pretended, if they had told the truth, for he was found with one 
head on his shoulders, and they had shown another as his undoubted 
and genuine head ever since his death; it had brought them vast 
sums of money, too.  The gold and jewels on his shrine filled two 
great chests, and eight men tottered as they carried them away.  
How rich the monasteries were you may infer from the fact that, 
when they were all suppressed, one hundred and thirty thousand 
pounds a year - in those days an immense sum - came to the Crown.

These things were not done without causing great discontent among 
the people.  The monks had been good landlords and hospitable 
entertainers of all travellers, and had been accustomed to give 
away a great deal of corn, and fruit, and meat, and other things.  
In those days it was difficult to change goods into money, in 
consequence of the roads being very few and very bad, and the 
carts, and waggons of the worst description; and they must either 
have given away some of the good things they possessed in enormous 
quantities, or have suffered them to spoil and moulder.  So, many 
of the people missed what it was more agreeable to get idly than to 
work for; and the monks who were driven out of their homes and 
wandered about encouraged their discontent; and there were, 
consequently, great risings in Lincolnshire and Yorkshire.  These 
were put down by terrific executions, from which the monks 
themselves did not escape, and the King went on grunting and 
growling in his own fat way, like a Royal pig.

I have told all this story of the religious houses at one time, to 
make it plainer, and to get back to the King's domestic affairs.

The unfortunate Queen Catherine was by this time dead; and the King 
was by this time as tired of his second Queen as he had been of his 
first.  As he had fallen in love with Anne when she was in the 
service of Catherine, so he now fell in love with another lady in 
the service of Anne.  See how wicked deeds are punished, and how 
bitterly and self-reproachfully the Queen must now have thought of 
her own rise to the throne!  The new fancy was a LADY JANE SEYMOUR; 
and the King no sooner set his mind on her, than he resolved to 
have Anne Boleyn's head.  So, he brought a number of charges 
against Anne, accusing her of dreadful crimes which she had never 
committed, and implicating in them her own brother and certain 
gentlemen in her service:  among whom one Norris, and Mark Smeaton 
a musician, are best remembered.  As the lords and councillors were 
as afraid of the King and as subservient to him as the meanest 
peasant in England was, they brought in Anne Boleyn guilty, and the 
other unfortunate persons accused with her, guilty too.  Those 
gentlemen died like men, with the exception of Smeaton, who had 
been tempted by the King into telling lies, which he called 
confessions, and who had expected to be pardoned; but who, I am 
very glad to say, was not.  There was then only the Queen to 
dispose of.  She had been surrounded in the Tower with women spies; 
had been monstrously persecuted and foully slandered; and had 
received no justice.  But her spirit rose with her afflictions; 
and, after having in vain tried to soften the King by writing an 
affecting letter to him which still exists, 'from her doleful 
prison in the Tower,' she resigned herself to death.  She said to 
those about her, very cheerfully, that she had heard say the 
executioner was a good one, and that she had a little neck (she 
laughed and clasped it with her hands as she said that), and would 
soon be out of her pain.  And she WAS soon out of her pain, poor 
creature, on the Green inside the Tower, and her body was flung 
into an old box and put away in the ground under the chapel.

There is a story that the King sat in his palace listening very 
anxiously for the sound of the cannon which was to announce this 
new murder; and that, when he heard it come booming on the air, he 
rose up in great spirits and ordered out his dogs to go a-hunting.  
He was bad enough to do it; but whether he did it or not, it is 
certain that he married Jane Seymour the very next day.

I have not much pleasure in recording that she lived just long 
enough to give birth to a son who was christened EDWARD, and then 
to die of a fever:  for, I cannot but think that any woman who 
married such a ruffian, and knew what innocent blood was on his 
hands, deserved the axe that would assuredly have fallen on the 
neck of Jane Seymour, if she had lived much longer.

Cranmer had done what he could to save some of the Church property 
for purposes of religion and education; but, the great families had 
been so hungry to get hold of it, that very little could be rescued 
for such objects.  Even MILES COVERDALE, who did the people the 
inestimable service of translating the Bible into English (which 
the unreformed religion never permitted to be done), was left in 
poverty while the great families clutched the Church lands and 
money.  The people had been told that when the Crown came into 
possession of these funds, it would not be necessary to tax them; 
but they were taxed afresh directly afterwards.  It was fortunate 
for them, indeed, that so many nobles were so greedy for this 
wealth; since, if it had remained with the Crown, there might have 
been no end to tyranny for hundreds of years.  One of the most 
active writers on the Church's side against the King was a member 
of his own family - a sort of distant cousin, REGINALD POLE by name 
- who attacked him in the most violent manner (though he received a 
pension from him all the time), and fought for the Church with his 
pen, day and night.  As he was beyond the King's reach - being in 
Italy - the King politely invited him over to discuss the subject; 
but he, knowing better than to come, and wisely staying where he 
was, the King's rage fell upon his brother Lord Montague, the 
Marquis of Exeter, and some other gentlemen:  who were tried for 
high treason in corresponding with him and aiding him - which they 
probably did - and were all executed.  The Pope made Reginald Pole 
a cardinal; but, so much against his will, that it is thought he 
even aspired in his own mind to the vacant throne of England, and 
had hopes of marrying the Princess Mary.  His being made a high 
priest, however, put an end to all that.  His mother, the venerable 
Countess of Salisbury - who was, unfortunately for herself, within 
the tyrant's reach - was the last of his relatives on whom his 
wrath fell.  When she was told to lay her grey head upon the block, 
she answered the executioner, 'No!  My head never committed 
treason, and if you want it, you shall seize it.'  So, she ran 
round and round the scaffold with the executioner striking at her, 
and her grey hair bedabbled with blood; and even when they held her 
down upon the block she moved her head about to the last, resolved 
to be no party to her own barbarous murder.  All this the people 
bore, as they had borne everything else.

Indeed they bore much more; for the slow fires of Smithfield were 
continually burning, and people were constantly being roasted to 
death - still to show what a good Christian the King was.  He 
defied the Pope and his Bull, which was now issued, and had come 
into England; but he burned innumerable people whose only offence 
was that they differed from the Pope's religious opinions.  There 
was a wretched man named LAMBERT, among others, who was tried for 
this before the King, and with whom six bishops argued one after 
another.  When he was quite exhausted (as well he might be, after 
six bishops), he threw himself on the King's mercy; but the King 
blustered out that he had no mercy for heretics.  So, HE too fed 
the fire.

All this the people bore, and more than all this yet.  The national 
spirit seems to have been banished from the kingdom at this time.  
The very people who were executed for treason, the very wives and 
friends of the 'bluff' King, spoke of him on the scaffold as a good 
prince, and a gentle prince - just as serfs in similar 
circumstances have been known to do, under the Sultan and Bashaws 
of the East, or under the fierce old tyrants of Russia, who poured 
boiling and freezing water on them alternately, until they died.  
The Parliament were as bad as the rest, and gave the King whatever 
he wanted; among other vile accommodations, they gave him new 
powers of murdering, at his will and pleasure, any one whom he 
might choose to call a traitor.  But the worst measure they passed 
was an Act of Six Articles, commonly called at the time 'the whip 
with six strings;' which punished offences against the Pope's 
opinions, without mercy, and enforced the very worst parts of the 
monkish religion.  Cranmer would have modified it, if he could; 
but, being overborne by the Romish party, had not the power.  As 
one of the articles declared that priests should not marry, and as 
he was married himself, he sent his wife and children into Germany, 
and began to tremble at his danger; none the less because he was, 
and had long been, the King's friend.  This whip of six strings was 
made under the King's own eye.  It should never be forgotten of him 
how cruelly he supported the worst of the Popish doctrines when 
there was nothing to be got by opposing them.

This amiable monarch now thought of taking another wife.  He 
proposed to the French King to have some of the ladies of the 
French Court exhibited before him, that he might make his Royal 
choice; but the French King answered that he would rather not have 
his ladies trotted out to be shown like horses at a fair.  He 
proposed to the Dowager Duchess of Milan, who replied that she 
might have thought of such a match if she had had two heads; but, 
that only owning one, she must beg to keep it safe.  At last 
Cromwell represented that there was a Protestant Princess in 
Germany - those who held the reformed religion were called 
Protestants, because their leaders had Protested against the abuses 
and impositions of the unreformed Church - named ANNE OF CLEVES, 
who was beautiful, and would answer the purpose admirably.  The 
King said was she a large woman, because he must have a fat wife?  
'O yes,' said Cromwell; 'she was very large, just the thing.'  On 
hearing this the King sent over his famous painter, Hans Holbein, 
to take her portrait.  Hans made her out to be so good-looking that 
the King was satisfied, and the marriage was arranged.  But, 
whether anybody had paid Hans to touch up the picture; or whether 
Hans, like one or two other painters, flattered a princess in the 
ordinary way of business, I cannot say:  all I know is, that when 
Anne came over and the King went to Rochester to meet her, and 
first saw her without her seeing him, he swore she was 'a great 
Flanders mare,' and said he would never marry her.  Being obliged 
to do it now matters had gone so far, he would not give her the 
presents he had prepared, and would never notice her.  He never 
forgave Cromwell his part in the affair.  His downfall dates from 
that time.

It was quickened by his enemies, in the interests of the unreformed 
religion, putting in the King's way, at a state dinner, a niece of 
the Duke of Norfolk, CATHERINE HOWARD, a young lady of fascinating 
manners, though small in stature and not particularly beautiful.  
Falling in love with her on the spot, the King soon divorced Anne 
of Cleves after making her the subject of much brutal talk, on 
pretence that she had been previously betrothed to some one else - 
which would never do for one of his dignity - and married 
Catherine.  It is probable that on his wedding day, of all days in 
the year, he sent his faithful Cromwell to the scaffold, and had 
his head struck off.  He further celebrated the occasion by burning 
at one time, and causing to be drawn to the fire on the same 
hurdles, some Protestant prisoners for denying the Pope's 
doctrines, and some Roman Catholic prisoners for denying his own 
supremacy.  Still the people bore it, and not a gentleman in 
England raised his hand.

But, by a just retribution, it soon came out that Catherine Howard, 
before her marriage, had been really guilty of such crimes as the 
King had falsely attributed to his second wife Anne Boleyn; so, 
again the dreadful axe made the King a widower, and this Queen 
passed away as so many in that reign had passed away before her.  
As an appropriate pursuit under the circumstances, Henry then 
applied himself to superintending the composition of a religious 
book called 'A necessary doctrine for any Christian Man.'  He must 
have been a little confused in his mind, I think, at about this 
period; for he was so false to himself as to be true to some one:  
that some one being Cranmer, whom the Duke of Norfolk and others of 
his enemies tried to ruin; but to whom the King was steadfast, and 
to whom he one night gave his ring, charging him when he should 
find himself, next day, accused of treason, to show it to the 
council board.  This Cranmer did to the confusion of his enemies.  
I suppose the King thought he might want him a little longer.

He married yet once more.  Yes, strange to say, he found in England 
another woman who would become his wife, and she was CATHERINE 
PARR, widow of Lord Latimer.  She leaned towards the reformed 
religion; and it is some comfort to know, that she tormented the 
King considerably by arguing a variety of doctrinal points with him 
on all possible occasions.  She had very nearly done this to her 
own destruction.  After one of these conversations the King in a 
very black mood actually instructed GARDINER, one of his Bishops 
who favoured the Popish opinions, to draw a bill of accusation 
against her, which would have inevitably brought her to the 
scaffold where her predecessors had died, but that one of her 
friends picked up the paper of instructions which had been dropped 
in the palace, and gave her timely notice.  She fell ill with 
terror; but managed the King so well when he came to entrap her 
into further statements - by saying that she had only spoken on 
such points to divert his mind and to get some information from his 
extraordinary wisdom - that he gave her a kiss and called her his 
sweetheart.  And, when the Chancellor came next day actually to 
take her to the Tower, the King sent him about his business, and 
honoured him with the epithets of a beast, a knave, and a fool.  So 
near was Catherine Parr to the block, and so narrow was her escape!

There was war with Scotland in this reign, and a short clumsy war 
with France for favouring Scotland; but, the events at home were so 
dreadful, and leave such an enduring stain on the country, that I 
need say no more of what happened abroad.

A few more horrors, and this reign is over.  There was a lady, ANNE 
ASKEW, in Lincolnshire, who inclined to the Protestant opinions, 
and whose husband being a fierce Catholic, turned her out of his 
house.  She came to London, and was considered as offending against 
the six articles, and was taken to the Tower, and put upon the rack 
- probably because it was hoped that she might, in her agony, 
criminate some obnoxious persons; if falsely, so much the better.  
She was tortured without uttering a cry, until the Lieutenant of 
the Tower would suffer his men to torture her no more; and then two 
priests who were present actually pulled off their robes, and 
turned the wheels of the rack with their own hands, so rending and 
twisting and breaking her that she was afterwards carried to the 
fire in a chair.  She was burned with three others, a gentleman, a 
clergyman, and a tailor; and so the world went on.

Either the King became afraid of the power of the Duke of Norfolk, 
and his son the Earl of Surrey, or they gave him some offence, but 
he resolved to pull THEM down, to follow all the rest who were 
gone.  The son was tried first - of course for nothing - and 
defended himself bravely; but of course he was found guilty, and of 
course he was executed.  Then his father was laid hold of, and left 
for death too.

But the King himself was left for death by a Greater King, and the 
earth was to be rid of him at last.  He was now a swollen, hideous 
spectacle, with a great hole in his leg, and so odious to every 
sense that it was dreadful to approach him.  When he was found to 
be dying, Cranmer was sent for from his palace at Croydon, and came 
with all speed, but found him speechless.  Happily, in that hour he 
perished.  He was in the fifty-sixth year of his age, and the 
thirty-eighth of his reign.

Henry the Eighth has been favoured by some Protestant writers, 
because the Reformation was achieved in his time.  But the mighty 
merit of it lies with other men and not with him; and it can be 
rendered none the worse by this monster's crimes, and none the 
better by any defence of them.  The plain truth is, that he was a 
most intolerable ruffian, a disgrace to human nature, and a blot of 
blood and grease upon the History of England.



CHAPTER XXIX - ENGLAND UNDER EDWARD THE SIXTH



HENRY THE EIGHTH had made a will, appointing a council of sixteen 
to govern the kingdom for his son while he was under age (he was 
now only ten years old), and another council of twelve to help 
them.  The most powerful of the first council was the EARL OF 
HERTFORD, the young King's uncle, who lost no time in bringing his 
nephew with great state up to Enfield, and thence to the Tower.  It 
was considered at the time a striking proof of virtue in the young 
King that he was sorry for his father's death; but, as common 
subjects have that virtue too, sometimes, we will say no more about 
it.

There was a curious part of the late King's will, requiring his 
executors to fulfil whatever promises he had made.  Some of the 
court wondering what these might be, the Earl of Hertford and the 
other noblemen interested, said that they were promises to advance 
and enrich THEM.  So, the Earl of Hertford made himself DUKE OF 
SOMERSET, and made his brother EDWARD SEYMOUR a baron; and there 
were various similar promotions, all very agreeable to the parties 
concerned, and very dutiful, no doubt, to the late King's memory.  
To be more dutiful still, they made themselves rich out of the 
Church lands, and were very comfortable.  The new Duke of Somerset 
caused himself to be declared PROTECTOR of the kingdom, and was, 
indeed, the King.

As young Edward the Sixth had been brought up in the principles of 
the Protestant religion, everybody knew that they would be 
maintained.  But Cranmer, to whom they were chiefly entrusted, 
advanced them steadily and temperately.  Many superstitious and 
ridiculous practices were stopped; but practices which were 
harmless were not interfered with.

The Duke of Somerset, the Protector, was anxious to have the young 
King engaged in marriage to the young Queen of Scotland, in order 
to prevent that princess from making an alliance with any foreign 
power; but, as a large party in Scotland were unfavourable to this 
plan, he invaded that country.  His excuse for doing so was, that 
the Border men - that is, the Scotch who lived in that part of the 
country where England and Scotland joined - troubled the English 
very much.  But there were two sides to this question; for the 
English Border men troubled the Scotch too; and, through many long 
years, there were perpetual border quarrels which gave rise to 
numbers of old tales and songs.  However, the Protector invaded 
Scotland; and ARRAN, the Scottish Regent, with an army twice as 
large as his, advanced to meet him.  They encountered on the banks 
of the river Esk, within a few miles of Edinburgh; and there, after 
a little skirmish, the Protector made such moderate proposals, in 
offering to retire if the Scotch would only engage not to marry 
their princess to any foreign prince, that the Regent thought the 
English were afraid.  But in this he made a horrible mistake; for 
the English soldiers on land, and the English sailors on the water, 
so set upon the Scotch, that they broke and fled, and more than ten 
thousand of them were killed.  It was a dreadful battle, for the 
fugitives were slain without mercy.  The ground for four miles, all 
the way to Edinburgh, was strewn with dead men, and with arms, and 
legs, and heads.  Some hid themselves in streams and were drowned; 
some threw away their armour and were killed running, almost naked; 
but in this battle of Pinkey the English lost only two or three 
hundred men.  They were much better clothed than the Scotch; at the 
poverty of whose appearance and country they were exceedingly 
astonished.

A Parliament was called when Somerset came back, and it repealed 
the whip with six strings, and did one or two other good things; 
though it unhappily retained the punishment of burning for those 
people who did not make believe to believe, in all religious 
matters, what the Government had declared that they must and should 
believe.  It also made a foolish law (meant to put down beggars), 
that any man who lived idly and loitered about for three days 
together, should be burned with a hot iron, made a slave, and wear 
an iron fetter.  But this savage absurdity soon came to an end, and 
went the way of a great many other foolish laws.

The Protector was now so proud that he sat in Parliament before all 
the nobles, on the right hand of the throne.  Many other noblemen, 
who only wanted to be as proud if they could get a chance, became 
his enemies of course; and it is supposed that he came back 
suddenly from Scotland because he had received news that his 
brother, LORD SEYMOUR, was becoming dangerous to him.  This lord 
was now High Admiral of England; a very handsome man, and a great 
favourite with the Court ladies - even with the young Princess 
Elizabeth, who romped with him a little more than young princesses 
in these times do with any one.  He had married Catherine Parr, the 
late King's widow, who was now dead; and, to strengthen his power, 
he secretly supplied the young King with money.  He may even have 
engaged with some of his brother's enemies in a plot to carry the 
boy off.  On these and other accusations, at any rate, he was 
confined in the Tower, impeached, and found guilty; his own 
brother's name being - unnatural and sad to tell - the first signed 
to the warrant of his execution.  He was executed on Tower Hill, 
and died denying his treason.  One of his last proceedings in this 
world was to write two letters, one to the Princess Elizabeth, and 
one to the Princess Mary, which a servant of his took charge of, 
and concealed in his shoe.  These letters are supposed to have 
urged them against his brother, and to revenge his death.  What 
they truly contained is not known; but there is no doubt that he 
had, at one time, obtained great influence over the Princess 
Elizabeth.

All this while, the Protestant religion was making progress.  The 
images which the people had gradually come to worship, were removed 
from the churches; the people were informed that they need not 
confess themselves to priests unless they chose; a common prayer-
book was drawn up in the English language, which all could 
understand, and many other improvements were made; still 
moderately.  For Cranmer was a very moderate man, and even 
restrained the Protestant clergy from violently abusing the 
unreformed religion - as they very often did, and which was not a 
good example.  But the people were at this time in great distress.  
The rapacious nobility who had come into possession of the Church 
lands, were very bad landlords.  They enclosed great quantities of 
ground for the feeding of sheep, which was then more profitable 
than the growing of crops; and this increased the general distress.  
So the people, who still understood little of what was going on 
about them, and still readily believed what the homeless monks told 
them - many of whom had been their good friends in their better 
days - took it into their heads that all this was owing to the 
reformed religion, and therefore rose, in many parts of the 
country.

The most powerful risings were in Devonshire and Norfolk.  In 
Devonshire, the rebellion was so strong that ten thousand men 
united within a few days, and even laid siege to Exeter.  But LORD 
RUSSELL, coming to the assistance of the citizens who defended that 
town, defeated the rebels; and, not only hanged the Mayor of one 
place, but hanged the vicar of another from his own church steeple.  
What with hanging and killing by the sword, four thousand of the 
rebels are supposed to have fallen in that one county.  In Norfolk 
(where the rising was more against the enclosure of open lands than 
against the reformed religion), the popular leader was a man named 
ROBERT KET, a tanner of Wymondham.  The mob were, in the first 
instance, excited against the tanner by one JOHN FLOWERDEW, a 
gentleman who owed him a grudge:  but the tanner was more than a 
match for the gentleman, since he soon got the people on his side, 
and established himself near Norwich with quite an army.  There was 
a large oak-tree in that place, on a spot called Moushold Hill, 
which Ket named the Tree of Reformation; and under its green 
boughs, he and his men sat, in the midsummer weather, holding 
courts of justice, and debating affairs of state.  They were even 
impartial enough to allow some rather tiresome public speakers to 
get up into this Tree of Reformation, and point out their errors to 
them, in long discourses, while they lay listening (not always 
without some grumbling and growling) in the shade below.  At last, 
one sunny July day, a herald appeared below the tree, and 
proclaimed Ket and all his men traitors, unless from that moment 
they dispersed and went home:  in which case they were to receive a 
pardon.  But, Ket and his men made light of the herald and became 
stronger than ever, until the Earl of Warwick went after them with 
a sufficient force, and cut them all to pieces.  A few were hanged, 
drawn, and quartered, as traitors, and their limbs were sent into 
various country places to be a terror to the people.  Nine of them 
were hanged upon nine green branches of the Oak of Reformation; and 
so, for the time, that tree may be said to have withered away.

The Protector, though a haughty man, had compassion for the real 
distresses of the common people, and a sincere desire to help them.  
But he was too proud and too high in degree to hold even their 
favour steadily; and many of the nobles always envied and hated 
him, because they were as proud and not as high as he.  He was at 
this time building a great Palace in the Strand:  to get the stone 
for which he blew up church steeples with gunpowder, and pulled 
down bishops' houses:  thus making himself still more disliked.  At 
length, his principal enemy, the Earl of Warwick - Dudley by name, 
and the son of that Dudley who had made himself so odious with 
Empson, in the reign of Henry the Seventh - joined with seven other 
members of the Council against him, formed a separate Council; and, 
becoming stronger in a few days, sent him to the Tower under 
twenty-nine articles of accusation.  After being sentenced by the 
Council to the forfeiture of all his offices and lands, he was 
liberated and pardoned, on making a very humble submission.  He was 
even taken back into the Council again, after having suffered this 
fall, and married his daughter, LADY ANNE SEYMOUR, to Warwick's 
eldest son.  But such a reconciliation was little likely to last, 
and did not outlive a year.  Warwick, having got himself made Duke 
of Northumberland, and having advanced the more important of his 
friends, then finished the history by causing the Duke of Somerset 
and his friend LORD GREY, and others, to be arrested for treason, 
in having conspired to seize and dethrone the King.  They were also 
accused of having intended to seize the new Duke of Northumberland, 
with his friends LORD NORTHAMPTON and LORD PEMBROKE; to murder them 
if they found need; and to raise the City to revolt.  All this the 
fallen Protector positively denied; except that he confessed to 
having spoken of the murder of those three noblemen, but having 
never designed it.  He was acquitted of the charge of treason, and 
found guilty of the other charges; so when the people - who 
remembered his having been their friend, now that he was disgraced 
and in danger, saw him come out from his trial with the axe turned 
from him - they thought he was altogether acquitted, and sent up a 
loud shout of joy.

But the Duke of Somerset was ordered to be beheaded on Tower Hill, 
at eight o'clock in the morning, and proclamations were issued 
bidding the citizens keep at home until after ten.  They filled the 
streets, however, and crowded the place of execution as soon as it 
was light; and, with sad faces and sad hearts, saw the once 
powerful Protector ascend the scaffold to lay his head upon the 
dreadful block.  While he was yet saying his last words to them 
with manly courage, and telling them, in particular, how it 
comforted him, at that pass, to have assisted in reforming the 
national religion, a member of the Council was seen riding up on 
horseback.  They again thought that the Duke was saved by his 
bringing a reprieve, and again shouted for joy.  But the Duke 
himself told them they were mistaken, and laid down his head and 
had it struck off at a blow.

Many of the bystanders rushed forward and steeped their 
handkerchiefs in his blood, as a mark of their affection.  He had, 
indeed, been capable of many good acts, and one of them was 
discovered after he was no more.  The Bishop of Durham, a very good 
man, had been informed against to the Council, when the Duke was in 
power, as having answered a treacherous letter proposing a 
rebellion against the reformed religion.  As the answer could not 
be found, he could not be declared guilty; but it was now 
discovered, hidden by the Duke himself among some private papers, 
in his regard for that good man.  The Bishop lost his office, and 
was deprived of his possessions.

It is not very pleasant to know that while his uncle lay in prison 
under sentence of death, the young King was being vastly 
entertained by plays, and dances, and sham fights:  but there is no 
doubt of it, for he kept a journal himself.  It is pleasanter to 
know that not a single Roman Catholic was burnt in this reign for 
holding that religion; though two wretched victims suffered for 
heresy.  One, a woman named JOAN BOCHER, for professing some 
opinions that even she could only explain in unintelligible jargon.  
The other, a Dutchman, named VON PARIS, who practised as a surgeon 
in London.  Edward was, to his credit, exceedingly unwilling to 
sign the warrant for the woman's execution:  shedding tears before 
he did so, and telling Cranmer, who urged him to do it (though 
Cranmer really would have spared the woman at first, but for her 
own determined obstinacy), that the guilt was not his, but that of 
the man who so strongly urged the dreadful act.  We shall see, too 
soon, whether the time ever came when Cranmer is likely to have 
remembered this with sorrow and remorse.

Cranmer and RIDLEY (at first Bishop of Rochester, and afterwards 
Bishop of London) were the most powerful of the clergy of this 
reign.  Others were imprisoned and deprived of their property for 
still adhering to the unreformed religion; the most important among 
whom were GARDINER Bishop of Winchester, HEATH Bishop of Worcester, 
DAY Bishop of Chichester, and BONNER that Bishop of London who was 
superseded by Ridley.  The Princess Mary, who inherited her 
mother's gloomy temper, and hated the reformed religion as 
connected with her mother's wrongs and sorrows - she knew nothing 
else about it, always refusing to read a single book in which it 
was truly described - held by the unreformed religion too, and was 
the only person in the kingdom for whom the old Mass was allowed to 
be performed; nor would the young King have made that exception 
even in her favour, but for the strong persuasions of Cranmer and 
Ridley.  He always viewed it with horror; and when he fell into a 
sickly condition, after having been very ill, first of the measles 
and then of the small-pox, he was greatly troubled in mind to think 
that if he died, and she, the next heir to the throne, succeeded, 
the Roman Catholic religion would be set up again.

This uneasiness, the Duke of Northumberland was not slow to 
encourage:  for, if the Princess Mary came to the throne, he, who 
had taken part with the Protestants, was sure to be disgraced.  
Now, the Duchess of Suffolk was descended from King Henry the 
Seventh; and, if she resigned what little or no right she had, in 
favour of her daughter LADY JANE GREY, that would be the succession 
to promote the Duke's greatness; because LORD GUILFORD DUDLEY, one 
of his sons, was, at this very time, newly married to her.  So, he 
worked upon the King's fears, and persuaded him to set aside both 
the Princess Mary and the Princess Elizabeth, and assert his right 
to appoint his successor.  Accordingly the young King handed to the 
Crown lawyers a writing signed half a dozen times over by himself, 
appointing Lady Jane Grey to succeed to the Crown, and requiring 
them to have his will made out according to law.  They were much 
against it at first, and told the King so; but the Duke of 
Northumberland - being so violent about it that the lawyers even 
expected him to beat them, and hotly declaring that, stripped to 
his shirt, he would fight any man in such a quarrel - they yielded.  
Cranmer, also, at first hesitated; pleading that he had sworn to 
maintain the succession of the Crown to the Princess Mary; but, he 
was a weak man in his resolutions, and afterwards signed the 
document with the rest of the council.

It was completed none too soon; for Edward was now sinking in a 
rapid decline; and, by way of making him better, they handed him 
over to a woman-doctor who pretended to be able to cure it.  He 
speedily got worse.  On the sixth of July, in the year one thousand 
five hundred and fifty-three, he died, very peaceably and piously, 
praying God, with his last breath, to protect the reformed 
religion.

This King died in the sixteenth year of his age, and in the seventh 
of his reign.  It is difficult to judge what the character of one 
so young might afterwards have become among so many bad, ambitious, 
quarrelling nobles.  But, he was an amiable boy, of very good 
abilities, and had nothing coarse or cruel or brutal in his 
disposition - which in the son of such a father is rather 
surprising.



CHAPTER XXX - ENGLAND UNDER MARY



THE Duke of Northumberland was very anxious to keep the young 
King's death a secret, in order that he might get the two 
Princesses into his power.  But, the Princess Mary, being informed 
of that event as she was on her way to London to see her sick 
brother, turned her horse's head, and rode away into Norfolk.  The 
Earl of Arundel was her friend, and it was he who sent her warning 
of what had happened.

As the secret could not be kept, the Duke of Northumberland and the 
council sent for the Lord Mayor of London and some of the aldermen, 
and made a merit of telling it to them.  Then, they made it known 
to the people, and set off to inform Lady Jane Grey that she was to 
be Queen.

She was a pretty girl of only sixteen, and was amiable, learned, 
and clever.  When the lords who came to her, fell on their knees 
before her, and told her what tidings they brought, she was so 
astonished that she fainted.  On recovering, she expressed her 
sorrow for the young King's death, and said that she knew she was 
unfit to govern the kingdom; but that if she must be Queen, she 
prayed God to direct her.  She was then at Sion House, near 
Brentford; and the lords took her down the river in state to the 
Tower, that she might remain there (as the custom was) until she 
was crowned.  But the people were not at all favourable to Lady 
Jane, considering that the right to be Queen was Mary's, and 
greatly disliking the Duke of Northumberland.  They were not put 
into a better humour by the Duke's causing a vintner's servant, one 
Gabriel Pot, to be taken up for expressing his dissatisfaction 
among the crowd, and to have his ears nailed to the pillory, and 
cut off.  Some powerful men among the nobility declared on Mary's 
side.  They raised troops to support her cause, had her proclaimed 
Queen at Norwich, and gathered around her at the castle of 
Framlingham, which belonged to the Duke of Norfolk.  For, she was 
not considered so safe as yet, but that it was best to keep her in 
a castle on the sea-coast, from whence she might be sent abroad, if 
necessary.

The Council would have despatched Lady Jane's father, the Duke of 
Suffolk, as the general of the army against this force; but, as 
Lady Jane implored that her father might remain with her, and as he 
was known to be but a weak man, they told the Duke of 
Northumberland that he must take the command himself.  He was not 
very ready to do so, as he mistrusted the Council much; but there 
was no help for it, and he set forth with a heavy heart, observing 
to a lord who rode beside him through Shoreditch at the head of the 
troops, that, although the people pressed in great numbers to look 
at them, they were terribly silent.

And his fears for himself turned out to be well founded.  While he 
was waiting at Cambridge for further help from the Council, the 
Council took it into their heads to turn their backs on Lady Jane's 
cause, and to take up the Princess Mary's.  This was chiefly owing 
to the before-mentioned Earl of Arundel, who represented to the 
Lord Mayor and aldermen, in a second interview with those sagacious 
persons, that, as for himself, he did not perceive the Reformed 
religion to be in much danger - which Lord Pembroke backed by 
flourishing his sword as another kind of persuasion.  The Lord 
Mayor and aldermen, thus enlightened, said there could be no doubt 
that the Princess Mary ought to be Queen.  So, she was proclaimed 
at the Cross by St. Paul's, and barrels of wine were given to the 
people, and they got very drunk, and danced round blazing bonfires 
- little thinking, poor wretches, what other bonfires would soon be 
blazing in Queen Mary's name.

After a ten days' dream of royalty, Lady Jane Grey resigned the 
Crown with great willingness, saying that she had only accepted it 
in obedience to her father and mother; and went gladly back to her 
pleasant house by the river, and her books.  Mary then came on 
towards London; and at Wanstead in Essex, was joined by her half-
sister, the Princess Elizabeth.  They passed through the streets of 
London to the Tower, and there the new Queen met some eminent 
prisoners then confined in it, kissed them, and gave them their 
liberty.  Among these was that Gardiner, Bishop of Winchester, who 
had been imprisoned in the last reign for holding to the unreformed 
religion.  Him she soon made chancellor.

The Duke of Northumberland had been taken prisoner, and, together 
with his son and five others, was quickly brought before the 
Council.  He, not unnaturally, asked that Council, in his defence, 
whether it was treason to obey orders that had been issued under 
the great seal; and, if it were, whether they, who had obeyed them 
too, ought to be his judges?  But they made light of these points; 
and, being resolved to have him out of the way, soon sentenced him 
to death.  He had risen into power upon the death of another man, 
and made but a poor show (as might be expected) when he himself lay 
low.  He entreated Gardiner to let him live, if it were only in a 
mouse's hole; and, when he ascended the scaffold to be beheaded on 
Tower Hill, addressed the people in a miserable way, saying that he 
had been incited by others, and exhorting them to return to the 
unreformed religion, which he told them was his faith.  There seems 
reason to suppose that he expected a pardon even then, in return 
for this confession; but it matters little whether he did or not.  
His head was struck off.

Mary was now crowned Queen.  She was thirty-seven years of age, 
short and thin, wrinkled in the face, and very unhealthy.  But she 
had a great liking for show and for bright colours, and all the 
ladies of her Court were magnificently dressed.  She had a great 
liking too for old customs, without much sense in them; and she was 
oiled in the oldest way, and blessed in the oldest way, and done 
all manner of things to in the oldest way, at her coronation.  I 
hope they did her good.

She soon began to show her desire to put down the Reformed 
religion, and put up the unreformed one:  though it was dangerous 
work as yet, the people being something wiser than they used to be.  
They even cast a shower of stones - and among them a dagger - at 
one of the royal chaplains who attacked the Reformed religion in a 
public sermon.  But the Queen and her priests went steadily on.  
Ridley, the powerful bishop of the last reign, was seized and sent 
to the Tower.  LATIMER, also celebrated among the Clergy of the 
last reign, was likewise sent to the Tower, and Cranmer speedily 
followed.  Latimer was an aged man; and, as his guards took him 
through Smithfield, he looked round it, and said, 'This is a place 
that hath long groaned for me.'  For he knew well, what kind of 
bonfires would soon be burning.  Nor was the knowledge confined to 
him.  The prisons were fast filled with the chief Protestants, who 
were there left rotting in darkness, hunger, dirt, and separation 
from their friends; many, who had time left them for escape, fled 
from the kingdom; and the dullest of the people began, now, to see 
what was coming.

It came on fast.  A Parliament was got together; not without strong 
suspicion of unfairness; and they annulled the divorce, formerly 
pronounced by Cranmer between the Queen's mother and King Henry the 
Eighth, and unmade all the laws on the subject of religion that had 
been made in the last King Edward's reign.  They began their 
proceedings, in violation of the law, by having the old mass said 
before them in Latin, and by turning out a bishop who would not 
kneel down.  They also declared guilty of treason, Lady Jane Grey 
for aspiring to the Crown; her husband, for being her husband; and 
Cranmer, for not believing in the mass aforesaid.  They then prayed 
the Queen graciously to choose a husband for herself, as soon as 
might be.

Now, the question who should be the Queen's husband had given rise 
to a great deal of discussion, and to several contending parties.  
Some said Cardinal Pole was the man - but the Queen was of opinion 
that he was NOT the man, he being too old and too much of a 
student.  Others said that the gallant young COURTENAY, whom the 
Queen had made Earl of Devonshire, was the man - and the Queen 
thought so too, for a while; but she changed her mind.  At last it 
appeared that PHILIP, PRINCE OF SPAIN, was certainly the man - 
though certainly not the people's man; for they detested the idea 
of such a marriage from the beginning to the end, and murmured that 
the Spaniard would establish in England, by the aid of foreign 
soldiers, the worst abuses of the Popish religion, and even the 
terrible Inquisition itself.

These discontents gave rise to a conspiracy for marrying young 
Courtenay to the Princess Elizabeth, and setting them up, with 
popular tumults all over the kingdom, against the Queen.  This was 
discovered in time by Gardiner; but in Kent, the old bold county, 
the people rose in their old bold way.  SIR THOMAS WYAT, a man of 
great daring, was their leader.  He raised his standard at 
Maidstone, marched on to Rochester, established himself in the old 
castle there, and prepared to hold out against the Duke of Norfolk, 
who came against him with a party of the Queen's guards, and a body 
of five hundred London men.  The London men, however, were all for 
Elizabeth, and not at all for Mary.  They declared, under the 
castle walls, for Wyat; the Duke retreated; and Wyat came on to 
Deptford, at the head of fifteen thousand men.

But these, in their turn, fell away.  When he came to Southwark, 
there were only two thousand left.  Not dismayed by finding the 
London citizens in arms, and the guns at the Tower ready to oppose 
his crossing the river there, Wyat led them off to Kingston-upon-
Thames, intending to cross the bridge that he knew to be in that 
place, and so to work his way round to Ludgate, one of the old 
gates of the City.  He found the bridge broken down, but mended it, 
came across, and bravely fought his way up Fleet Street to Ludgate 
Hill.  Finding the gate closed against him, he fought his way back 
again, sword in hand, to Temple Bar.  Here, being overpowered, he 
surrendered himself, and three or four hundred of his men were 
taken, besides a hundred killed.  Wyat, in a moment of weakness 
(and perhaps of torture) was afterwards made to accuse the Princess 
Elizabeth as his accomplice to some very small extent.  But his 
manhood soon returned to him, and he refused to save his life by 
making any more false confessions.  He was quartered and 
distributed in the usual brutal way, and from fifty to a hundred of 
his followers were hanged.  The rest were led out, with halters 
round their necks, to be pardoned, and to make a parade of crying 
out, 'God save Queen Mary!'

In the danger of this rebellion, the Queen showed herself to be a 
woman of courage and spirit.  She disdained to retreat to any place 
of safety, and went down to the Guildhall, sceptre in hand, and 
made a gallant speech to the Lord Mayor and citizens.  But on the 
day after Wyat's defeat, she did the most cruel act, even of her 
cruel reign, in signing the warrant for the execution of Lady Jane 
Grey.

They tried to persuade Lady Jane to accept the unreformed religion; 
but she steadily refused.  On the morning when she was to die, she 
saw from her window the bleeding and headless body of her husband 
brought back in a cart from the scaffold on Tower Hill where he had 
laid down his life.  But, as she had declined to see him before his 
execution, lest she should be overpowered and not make a good end, 
so, she even now showed a constancy and calmness that will never be 
forgotten.  She came up to the scaffold with a firm step and a 
quiet face, and addressed the bystanders in a steady voice.  They 
were not numerous; for she was too young, too innocent and fair, to 
be murdered before the people on Tower Hill, as her husband had 
just been; so, the place of her execution was within the Tower 
itself.  She said that she had done an unlawful act in taking what 
was Queen Mary's right; but that she had done so with no bad 
intent, and that she died a humble Christian.  She begged the 
executioner to despatch her quickly, and she asked him, 'Will you 
take my head off before I lay me down?'  He answered, 'No, Madam,' 
and then she was very quiet while they bandaged her eyes.  Being 
blinded, and unable to see the block on which she was to lay her 
young head, she was seen to feel about for it with her hands, and 
was heard to say, confused, 'O what shall I do!  Where is it?'  
Then they guided her to the right place, and the executioner struck 
off her head.  You know too well, now, what dreadful deeds the 
executioner did in England, through many, many years, and how his 
axe descended on the hateful block through the necks of some of the 
bravest, wisest, and best in the land.  But it never struck so 
cruel and so vile a blow as this.

The father of Lady Jane soon followed, but was little pitied.  
Queen Mary's next object was to lay hold of Elizabeth, and this was 
pursued with great eagerness.  Five hundred men were sent to her 
retired house at Ashridge, by Berkhampstead, with orders to bring 
her up, alive or dead.  They got there at ten at night, when she 
was sick in bed.  But, their leaders followed her lady into her 
bedchamber, whence she was brought out betimes next morning, and 
put into a litter to be conveyed to London.  She was so weak and 
ill, that she was five days on the road; still, she was so resolved 
to be seen by the people that she had the curtains of the litter 
opened; and so, very pale and sickly, passed through the streets.  
She wrote to her sister, saying she was innocent of any crime, and 
asking why she was made a prisoner; but she got no answer, and was 
ordered to the Tower.  They took her in by the Traitor's Gate, to 
which she objected, but in vain.  One of the lords who conveyed her 
offered to cover her with his cloak, as it was raining, but she put 
it away from her, proudly and scornfully, and passed into the 
Tower, and sat down in a court-yard on a stone.  They besought her 
to come in out of the wet; but she answered that it was better 
sitting there, than in a worse place.  At length she went to her 
apartment, where she was kept a prisoner, though not so close a 
prisoner as at Woodstock, whither she was afterwards removed, and 
where she is said to have one day envied a milkmaid whom she heard 
singing in the sunshine as she went through the green fields.  
Gardiner, than whom there were not many worse men among the fierce 
and sullen priests, cared little to keep secret his stern desire 
for her death:  being used to say that it was of little service to 
shake off the leaves, and lop the branches of the tree of heresy, 
if its root, the hope of heretics, were left.  He failed, however, 
in his benevolent design.  Elizabeth was, at length, released; and 
Hatfield House was assigned to her as a residence, under the care 
of one SIR THOMAS POPE.

It would seem that Philip, the Prince of Spain, was a main cause of 
this change in Elizabeth's fortunes.  He was not an amiable man, 
being, on the contrary, proud, overbearing, and gloomy; but he and 
the Spanish lords who came over with him, assuredly did 
discountenance the idea of doing any violence to the Princess.  It 
may have been mere prudence, but we will hope it was manhood and 
honour.  The Queen had been expecting her husband with great 
impatience, and at length he came, to her great joy, though he 
never cared much for her.  They were married by Gardiner, at 
Winchester, and there was more holiday-making among the people; but 
they had their old distrust of this Spanish marriage, in which even 
the Parliament shared.  Though the members of that Parliament were 
far from honest, and were strongly suspected to have been bought 
with Spanish money, they would pass no bill to enable the Queen to 
set aside the Princess Elizabeth and appoint her own successor.

Although Gardiner failed in this object, as well as in the darker 
one of bringing the Princess to the scaffold, he went on at a great 
pace in the revival of the unreformed religion.  A new Parliament 
was packed, in which there were no Protestants.  Preparations were 
made to receive Cardinal Pole in England as the Pope's messenger, 
bringing his holy declaration that all the nobility who had 
acquired Church property, should keep it - which was done to enlist 
their selfish interest on the Pope's side.  Then a great scene was 
enacted, which was the triumph of the Queen's plans.  Cardinal Pole 
arrived in great splendour and dignity, and was received with great 
pomp.  The Parliament joined in a petition expressive of their 
sorrow at the change in the national religion, and praying him to 
receive the country again into the Popish Church.  With the Queen 
sitting on her throne, and the King on one side of her, and the 
Cardinal on the other, and the Parliament present, Gardiner read 
the petition aloud.  The Cardinal then made a great speech, and was 
so obliging as to say that all was forgotten and forgiven, and that 
the kingdom was solemnly made Roman Catholic again.

Everything was now ready for the lighting of the terrible bonfires.  
The Queen having declared to the Council, in writing, that she 
would wish none of her subjects to be burnt without some of the 
Council being present, and that she would particularly wish there 
to be good sermons at all burnings, the Council knew pretty well 
what was to be done next.  So, after the Cardinal had blessed all 
the bishops as a preface to the burnings, the Chancellor Gardiner 
opened a High Court at Saint Mary Overy, on the Southwark side of 
London Bridge, for the trial of heretics.  Here, two of the late 
Protestant clergymen, HOOPER, Bishop of Gloucester, and ROGERS, a 
Prebendary of St. Paul's, were brought to be tried.  Hooper was 
tried first for being married, though a priest, and for not 
believing in the mass.  He admitted both of these accusations, and 
said that the mass was a wicked imposition.  Then they tried 
Rogers, who said the same.  Next morning the two were brought up to 
be sentenced; and then Rogers said that his poor wife, being a 
German woman and a stranger in the land, he hoped might be allowed 
to come to speak to him before he died.  To this the inhuman 
Gardiner replied, that she was not his wife.  'Yea, but she is, my 
lord,' said Rogers, 'and she hath been my wife these eighteen 
years.'  His request was still refused, and they were both sent to 
Newgate; all those who stood in the streets to sell things, being 
ordered to put out their lights that the people might not see them.  
But, the people stood at their doors with candles in their hands, 
and prayed for them as they went by.  Soon afterwards, Rogers was 
taken out of jail to be burnt in Smithfield; and, in the crowd as 
he went along, he saw his poor wife and his ten children, of whom 
the youngest was a little baby.  And so he was burnt to death.

The next day, Hooper, who was to be burnt at Gloucester, was 
brought out to take his last journey, and was made to wear a hood 
over his face that he might not be known by the people.  But, they 
did know him for all that, down in his own part of the country; 
and, when he came near Gloucester, they lined the road, making 
prayers and lamentations.  His guards took him to a lodging, where 
he slept soundly all night.  At nine o'clock next morning, he was 
brought forth leaning on a staff; for he had taken cold in prison, 
and was infirm.  The iron stake, and the iron chain which was to 
bind him to it, were fixed up near a great elm-tree in a pleasant 
open place before the cathedral, where, on peaceful Sundays, he had 
been accustomed to preach and to pray, when he was bishop of 
Gloucester.  This tree, which had no leaves then, it being 
February, was filled with people; and the priests of Gloucester 
College were looking complacently on from a window, and there was a 
great concourse of spectators in every spot from which a glimpse of 
the dreadful sight could be beheld.  When the old man kneeled down 
on the small platform at the foot of the stake, and prayed aloud, 
the nearest people were observed to be so attentive to his prayers 
that they were ordered to stand farther back; for it did not suit 
the Romish Church to have those Protestant words heard.  His 
prayers concluded, he went up to the stake and was stripped to his 
shirt, and chained ready for the fire.  One of his guards had such 
compassion on him that, to shorten his agonies, he tied some 
packets of gunpowder about him.  Then they heaped up wood and straw 
and reeds, and set them all alight.  But, unhappily, the wood was 
green and damp, and there was a wind blowing that blew what flame 
there was, away.  Thus, through three-quarters of an hour, the good 
old man was scorched and roasted and smoked, as the fire rose and 
sank; and all that time they saw him, as he burned, moving his lips 
in prayer, and beating his breast with one hand, even after the 
other was burnt away and had fallen off.

Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer, were taken to Oxford to dispute with 
a commission of priests and doctors about the mass.  They were 
shamefully treated; and it is recorded that the Oxford scholars 
hissed and howled and groaned, and misconducted themselves in an 
anything but a scholarly way.  The prisoners were taken back to 
jail, and afterwards tried in St. Mary's Church.  They were all 
found guilty.  On the sixteenth of the month of October, Ridley and 
Latimer were brought out, to make another of the dreadful bonfires.

The scene of the suffering of these two good Protestant men was in 
the City ditch, near Baliol College.  On coming to the dreadful 
spot, they kissed the stakes, and then embraced each other.  And 
then a learned doctor got up into a pulpit which was placed there, 
and preached a sermon from the text, 'Though I give my body to be 
burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing.'  When you 
think of the charity of burning men alive, you may imagine that 
this learned doctor had a rather brazen face.  Ridley would have 
answered his sermon when it came to an end, but was not allowed.  
When Latimer was stripped, it appeared that he had dressed himself 
under his other clothes, in a new shroud; and, as he stood in it 
before all the people, it was noted of him, and long remembered, 
that, whereas he had been stooping and feeble but a few minutes 
before, he now stood upright and handsome, in the knowledge that he 
was dying for a just and a great cause.  Ridley's brother-in-law 
was there with bags of gunpowder; and when they were both chained 
up, he tied them round their bodies.  Then, a light was thrown upon 
the pile to fire it.  'Be of good comfort, Master Ridley,' said 
Latimer, at that awful moment, 'and play the man!  We shall this 
day light such a candle, by God's grace, in England, as I trust 
shall never be put out.'  And then he was seen to make motions with 
his hands as if he were washing them in the flames, and to stroke 
his aged face with them, and was heard to cry, 'Father of Heaven, 
receive my soul!'  He died quickly, but the fire, after having 
burned the legs of Ridley, sunk.  There he lingered, chained to the 
iron post, and crying, 'O!  I cannot burn!  O! for Christ's sake 
let the fire come unto me!'  And still, when his brother-in-law had 
heaped on more wood, he was heard through the blinding smoke, still 
dismally crying, 'O!  I cannot burn, I cannot burn!'  At last, the 
gunpowder caught fire, and ended his miseries.

Five days after this fearful scene, Gardiner went to his tremendous 
account before God, for the cruelties he had so much assisted in 
committing.

Cranmer remained still alive and in prison.  He was brought out 
again in February, for more examining and trying, by Bonner, Bishop 
of London:  another man of blood, who had succeeded to Gardiner's 
work, even in his lifetime, when Gardiner was tired of it.  Cranmer 
was now degraded as a priest, and left for death; but, if the Queen 
hated any one on earth, she hated him, and it was resolved that he 
should be ruined and disgraced to the utmost.  There is no doubt 
that the Queen and her husband personally urged on these deeds, 
because they wrote to the Council, urging them to be active in the 
kindling of the fearful fires.  As Cranmer was known not to be a 
firm man, a plan was laid for surrounding him with artful people, 
and inducing him to recant to the unreformed religion.  Deans and 
friars visited him, played at bowls with him, showed him various 
attentions, talked persuasively with him, gave him money for his 
prison comforts, and induced him to sign, I fear, as many as six 
recantations.  But when, after all, he was taken out to be burnt, 
he was nobly true to his better self, and made a glorious end.

After prayers and a sermon, Dr. Cole, the preacher of the day (who 
had been one of the artful priests about Cranmer in prison), 
required him to make a public confession of his faith before the 
people.  This, Cole did, expecting that he would declare himself a 
Roman Catholic.  'I will make a profession of my faith,' said 
Cranmer, 'and with a good will too.'

Then, he arose before them all, and took from the sleeve of his 
robe a written prayer and read it aloud.  That done, he kneeled and 
said the Lord's Prayer, all the people joining; and then he arose 
again and told them that he believed in the Bible, and that in what 
he had lately written, he had written what was not the truth, and 
that, because his right hand had signed those papers, he would burn 
his right hand first when he came to the fire.  As for the Pope, he 
did refuse him and denounce him as the enemy of Heaven.  Hereupon 
the pious Dr. Cole cried out to the guards to stop that heretic's 
mouth and take him away.

So they took him away, and chained him to the stake, where he 
hastily took off his own clothes to make ready for the flames.  And 
he stood before the people with a bald head and a white and flowing 
beard.  He was so firm now when the worst was come, that he again 
declared against his recantation, and was so impressive and so 
undismayed, that a certain lord, who was one of the directors of 
the execution, called out to the men to make haste!  When the fire 
was lighted, Cranmer, true to his latest word, stretched out his 
right hand, and crying out, 'This hand hath offended!' held it 
among the flames, until it blazed and burned away.  His heart was 
found entire among his ashes, and he left at last a memorable name 
in English history.  Cardinal Pole celebrated the day by saying his 
first mass, and next day he was made Archbishop of Canterbury in 
Cranmer's place.

The Queen's husband, who was now mostly abroad in his own 
dominions, and generally made a coarse jest of her to his more 
familiar courtiers, was at war with France, and came over to seek 
the assistance of England.  England was very unwilling to engage in 
a French war for his sake; but it happened that the King of France, 
at this very time, aided a descent upon the English coast.  Hence, 
war was declared, greatly to Philip's satisfaction; and the Queen 
raised a sum of money with which to carry it on, by every 
unjustifiable means in her power.  It met with no profitable 
return, for the French Duke of Guise surprised Calais, and the 
English sustained a complete defeat.  The losses they met with in 
France greatly mortified the national pride, and the Queen never 
recovered the blow.

There was a bad fever raging in England at this time, and I am glad 
to write that the Queen took it, and the hour of her death came.  
'When I am dead and my body is opened,' she said to those around 
those around her, 'ye shall find CALAIS written on my heart.'  I 
should have thought, if anything were written on it, they would 
have found the words - JANE GREY, HOOPER, ROGERS, RIDLEY, LATIMER, 
CRANMER, AND THREE HUNDRED PEOPLE BURNT ALIVE WITHIN FOUR YEARS OF 
MY WICKED REIGN, INCLUDING SIXTY WOMEN AND FORTY LITTLE CHILDREN.  
But it is enough that their deaths were written in Heaven.

The Queen died on the seventeenth of November, fifteen hundred and 
fifty-eight, after reigning not quite five years and a half, and in 
the forty-fourth year of her age.  Cardinal Pole died of the same 
fever next day.

As BLOODY QUEEN MARY, this woman has become famous, and as BLOODY 
QUEEN MARY, she will ever be justly remembered with horror and 
detestation in Great Britain.  Her memory has been held in such 
abhorrence that some writers have arisen in later years to take her 
part, and to show that she was, upon the whole, quite an amiable 
and cheerful sovereign!  'By their fruits ye shall know them,' said 
OUR SAVIOUR.  The stake and the fire were the fruits of this reign, 
and you will judge this Queen by nothing else.



CHAPTER XXXI - ENGLAND UNDER ELIZABETH



THERE was great rejoicing all over the land when the Lords of the 
Council went down to Hatfield, to hail the Princess Elizabeth as 
the new Queen of England.  Weary of the barbarities of Mary's 
reign, the people looked with hope and gladness to the new 
Sovereign.  The nation seemed to wake from a horrible dream; and 
Heaven, so long hidden by the smoke of the fires that roasted men 
and women to death, appeared to brighten once more.

Queen Elizabeth was five-and-twenty years of age when she rode 
through the streets of London, from the Tower to Westminster Abbey, 
to be crowned.  Her countenance was strongly marked, but on the 
whole, commanding and dignified; her hair was red, and her nose 
something too long and sharp for a woman's.  She was not the 
beautiful creature her courtiers made out; but she was well enough, 
and no doubt looked all the better for coming after the dark and 
gloomy Mary.  She was well educated, but a roundabout writer, and 
rather a hard swearer and coarse talker.  She was clever, but 
cunning and deceitful, and inherited much of her father's violent 
temper.  I mention this now, because she has been so over-praised 
by one party, and so over-abused by another, that it is hardly 
possible to understand the greater part of her reign without first 
understanding what kind of woman she really was.

She began her reign with the great advantage of having a very wise 
and careful Minister, SIR WILLIAM CECIL, whom she afterwards made 
LORD BURLEIGH.  Altogether, the people had greater reason for 
rejoicing than they usually had, when there were processions in the 
streets; and they were happy with some reason.  All kinds of shows 
and images were set up; GOG and MAGOG were hoisted to the top of 
Temple Bar, and (which was more to the purpose) the Corporation 
dutifully presented the young Queen with the sum of a thousand 
marks in gold - so heavy a present, that she was obliged to take it 
into her carriage with both hands.  The coronation was a great 
success; and, on the next day, one of the courtiers presented a 
petition to the new Queen, praying that as it was the custom to 
release some prisoners on such occasions, she would have the 
goodness to release the four Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and 
John, and also the Apostle Saint Paul, who had been for some time 
shut up in a strange language so that the people could not get at 
them.

To this, the Queen replied that it would be better first to inquire 
of themselves whether they desired to be released or not; and, as a 
means of finding out, a great public discussion - a sort of 
religious tournament - was appointed to take place between certain 
champions of the two religions, in Westminster Abbey.  You may 
suppose that it was soon made pretty clear to common sense, that 
for people to benefit by what they repeat or read, it is rather 
necessary they should understand something about it.  Accordingly, 
a Church Service in plain English was settled, and other laws and 
regulations were made, completely establishing the great work of 
the Reformation.  The Romish bishops and champions were not harshly 
dealt with, all things considered; and the Queen's Ministers were 
both prudent and merciful.

The one great trouble of this reign, and the unfortunate cause of 
the greater part of such turmoil and bloodshed as occurred in it, 
was MARY STUART, QUEEN OF SCOTS.  We will try to understand, in as 
few words as possible, who Mary was, what she was, and how she came 
to be a thorn in the royal pillow of Elizabeth.

She was the daughter of the Queen Regent of Scotland, MARY OF 
GUISE.  She had been married, when a mere child, to the Dauphin, 
the son and heir of the King of France.  The Pope, who pretended 
that no one could rightfully wear the crown of England without his 
gracious permission, was strongly opposed to Elizabeth, who had not 
asked for the said gracious permission.  And as Mary Queen of Scots 
would have inherited the English crown in right of her birth, 
supposing the English Parliament not to have altered the 
succession, the Pope himself, and most of the discontented who were 
followers of his, maintained that Mary was the rightful Queen of 
England, and Elizabeth the wrongful Queen.  Mary being so closely 
connected with France, and France being jealous of England, there 
was far greater danger in this than there would have been if she 
had had no alliance with that great power.  And when her young 
husband, on the death of his father, became FRANCIS THE SECOND, 
King of France, the matter grew very serious.  For, the young 
couple styled themselves King and Queen of England, and the Pope 
was disposed to help them by doing all the mischief he could.

Now, the reformed religion, under the guidance of a stern and 
powerful preacher, named JOHN KNOX, and other such men, had been 
making fierce progress in Scotland.  It was still a half savage 
country, where there was a great deal of murdering and rioting 
continually going on; and the Reformers, instead of reforming those 
evils as they should have done, went to work in the ferocious old 
Scottish spirit, laying churches and chapels waste, pulling down 
pictures and altars, and knocking about the Grey Friars, and the 
Black Friars, and the White Friars, and the friars of all sorts of 
colours, in all directions.  This obdurate and harsh spirit of the 
Scottish Reformers (the Scotch have always been rather a sullen and 
frowning people in religious matters) put up the blood of the 
Romish French court, and caused France to send troops over to 
Scotland, with the hope of setting the friars of all sorts of 
colours on their legs again; of conquering that country first, and 
England afterwards; and so crushing the Reformation all to pieces.  
The Scottish Reformers, who had formed a great league which they 
called The Congregation of the Lord, secretly represented to 
Elizabeth that, if the reformed religion got the worst of it with 
them, it would be likely to get the worst of it in England too; and 
thus, Elizabeth, though she had a high notion of the rights of 
Kings and Queens to do anything they liked, sent an army to 
Scotland to support the Reformers, who were in arms against their 
sovereign.  All these proceedings led to a treaty of peace at 
Edinburgh, under which the French consented to depart from the 
kingdom.  By a separate treaty, Mary and her young husband engaged 
to renounce their assumed title of King and Queen of England.  But 
this treaty they never fulfilled.

It happened, soon after matters had got to this state, that the 
young French King died, leaving Mary a young widow.  She was then 
invited by her Scottish subjects to return home and reign over 
them; and as she was not now happy where she was, she, after a 
little time, complied.

Elizabeth had been Queen three years, when Mary Queen of Scots 
embarked at Calais for her own rough, quarrelling country.  As she 
came out of the harbour, a vessel was lost before her eyes, and she 
said, 'O! good God! what an omen this is for such a voyage!'  She 
was very fond of France, and sat on the deck, looking back at it 
and weeping, until it was quite dark.  When she went to bed, she 
directed to be called at daybreak, if the French coast were still 
visible, that she might behold it for the last time.  As it proved 
to be a clear morning, this was done, and she again wept for the 
country she was leaving, and said many times, ' Farewell, France!  
Farewell, France!  I shall never see thee again!'  All this was 
long remembered afterwards, as sorrowful and interesting in a fair 
young princess of nineteen.  Indeed, I am afraid it gradually came, 
together with her other distresses, to surround her with greater 
sympathy than she deserved.

When she came to Scotland, and took up her abode at the palace of 
Holyrood in Edinburgh, she found herself among uncouth strangers 
and wild uncomfortable customs very different from her experiences 
in the court of France.  The very people who were disposed to love 
her, made her head ache when she was tired out by her voyage, with 
a serenade of discordant music - a fearful concert of bagpipes, I 
suppose - and brought her and her train home to her palace on 
miserable little Scotch horses that appeared to be half starved.  
Among the people who were not disposed to love her, she found the 
powerful leaders of the Reformed Church, who were bitter upon her 
amusements, however innocent, and denounced music and dancing as 
works of the devil.  John Knox himself often lectured her, 
violently and angrily, and did much to make her life unhappy.  All 
these reasons confirmed her old attachment to the Romish religion, 
and caused her, there is no doubt, most imprudently and dangerously 
both for herself and for England too, to give a solemn pledge to 
the heads of the Romish Church that if she ever succeeded to the 
English crown, she would set up that religion again.  In reading 
her unhappy history, you must always remember this; and also that 
during her whole life she was constantly put forward against the 
Queen, in some form or other, by the Romish party.

That Elizabeth, on the other hand, was not inclined to like her, is 
pretty certain.  Elizabeth was very vain and jealous, and had an 
extraordinary dislike to people being married.  She treated Lady 
Catherine Grey, sister of the beheaded Lady Jane, with such 
shameful severity, for no other reason than her being secretly 
married, that she died and her husband was ruined; so, when a 
second marriage for Mary began to be talked about, probably 
Elizabeth disliked her more.  Not that Elizabeth wanted suitors of 
her own, for they started up from Spain, Austria, Sweden, and 
England.  Her English lover at this time, and one whom she much 
favoured too, was LORD ROBERT DUDLEY, Earl of Leicester - himself 
secretly married to AMY ROBSART, the daughter of an English 
gentleman, whom he was strongly suspected of causing to be 
murdered, down at his country seat, Cumnor Hall in Berkshire, that 
he might be free to marry the Queen.  Upon this story, the great 
writer, SIR WALTER SCOTT, has founded one of his best romances.  
But if Elizabeth knew how to lead her handsome favourite on, for 
her own vanity and pleasure, she knew how to stop him for her own 
pride; and his love, and all the other proposals, came to nothing.  
The Queen always declared in good set speeches, that she would 
never be married at all, but would live and die a Maiden Queen.  It 
was a very pleasant and meritorious declaration, I suppose; but it 
has been puffed and trumpeted so much, that I am rather tired of it 
myself.

Divers princes proposed to marry Mary, but the English court had 
reasons for being jealous of them all, and even proposed as a 
matter of policy that she should marry that very Earl of Leicester 
who had aspired to be the husband of Elizabeth.  At last, LORD 
DARNLEY, son of the Earl of Lennox, and himself descended from the 
Royal Family of Scotland, went over with Elizabeth's consent to try 
his fortune at Holyrood.  He was a tall simpleton; and could dance 
and play the guitar; but I know of nothing else he could do, unless 
it were to get very drunk, and eat gluttonously, and make a 
contemptible spectacle of himself in many mean and vain ways.  
However, he gained Mary's heart, not disdaining in the pursuit of 
his object to ally himself with one of her secretaries, DAVID 
RIZZIO, who had great influence with her.  He soon married the 
Queen.  This marriage does not say much for her, but what followed 
will presently say less.

Mary's brother, the EARL OF MURRAY, and head of the Protestant 
party in Scotland, had opposed this marriage, partly on religious 
grounds, and partly perhaps from personal dislike of the very 
contemptible bridegroom.  When it had taken place, through Mary's 
gaining over to it the more powerful of the lords about her, she 
banished Murray for his pains; and, when he and some other nobles 
rose in arms to support the reformed religion, she herself, within 
a month of her wedding day, rode against them in armour with loaded 
pistols in her saddle.  Driven out of Scotland, they presented 
themselves before Elizabeth - who called them traitors in public, 
and assisted them in private, according to her crafty nature.

Mary had been married but a little while, when she began to hate 
her husband, who, in his turn, began to hate that David Rizzio, 
with whom he had leagued to gain her favour, and whom he now 
believed to be her lover.  He hated Rizzio to that extent, that he 
made a compact with LORD RUTHVEN and three other lords to get rid 
of him by murder.  This wicked agreement they made in solemn 
secrecy upon the first of March, fifteen hundred and sixty-six, and 
on the night of Saturday the ninth, the conspirators were brought 
by Darnley up a private staircase, dark and steep, into a range of 
rooms where they knew that Mary was sitting at supper with her 
sister, Lady Argyle, and this doomed man.  When they went into the 
room, Darnley took the Queen round the waist, and Lord Ruthven, who 
had risen from a bed of sickness to do this murder, came in, gaunt 
and ghastly, leaning on two men.  Rizzio ran behind the Queen for 
shelter and protection.  'Let him come out of the room,' said 
Ruthven.  'He shall not leave the room,' replied the Queen; 'I read 
his danger in your face, and it is my will that he remain here.'  
They then set upon him, struggled with him, overturned the table, 
dragged him out, and killed him with fifty-six stabs.  When the 
Queen heard that he was dead, she said, 'No more tears.  I will 
think now of revenge!'

Within a day or two, she gained her husband over, and prevailed on 
the tall idiot to abandon the conspirators and fly with her to 
Dunbar.  There, he issued a proclamation, audaciously and falsely 
denying that he had any knowledge of the late bloody business; and 
there they were joined by the EARL BOTHWELL and some other nobles.  
With their help, they raised eight thousand men; returned to 
Edinburgh, and drove the assassins into England.  Mary soon 
afterwards gave birth to a son - still thinking of revenge.

That she should have had a greater scorn for her husband after his 
late cowardice and treachery than she had had before, was natural 
enough.  There is little doubt that she now began to love Bothwell 
instead, and to plan with him means of getting rid of Darnley.  
Bothwell had such power over her that he induced her even to pardon 
the assassins of Rizzio.  The arrangements for the Christening of 
the young Prince were entrusted to him, and he was one of the most 
important people at the ceremony, where the child was named JAMES:  
Elizabeth being his godmother, though not present on the occasion.  
A week afterwards, Darnley, who had left Mary and gone to his 
father's house at Glasgow, being taken ill with the small-pox, she 
sent her own physician to attend him.  But there is reason to 
apprehend that this was merely a show and a pretence, and that she 
knew what was doing, when Bothwell within another month proposed to 
one of the late conspirators against Rizzio, to murder Darnley, 
'for that it was the Queen's mind that he should be taken away.'  
It is certain that on that very day she wrote to her ambassador in 
France, complaining of him, and yet went immediately to Glasgow, 
feigning to be very anxious about him, and to love him very much.  
If she wanted to get him in her power, she succeeded to her heart's 
content; for she induced him to go back with her to Edinburgh, and 
to occupy, instead of the palace, a lone house outside the city 
called the Kirk of Field.  Here, he lived for about a week.  One 
Sunday night, she remained with him until ten o'clock, and then 
left him, to go to Holyrood to be present at an entertainment given 
in celebration of the marriage of one of her favourite servants.  
At two o'clock in the morning the city was shaken by a great 
explosion, and the Kirk of Field was blown to atoms.

Darnley's body was found next day lying under a tree at some 
distance.  How it came there, undisfigured and unscorched by 
gunpowder, and how this crime came to be so clumsily and strangely 
committed, it is impossible to discover.  The deceitful character 
of Mary, and the deceitful character of Elizabeth, have rendered 
almost every part of their joint history uncertain and obscure.  
But, I fear that Mary was unquestionably a party to her husband's 
murder, and that this was the revenge she had threatened.  The 
Scotch people universally believed it.  Voices cried out in the 
streets of Edinburgh in the dead of the night, for justice on the 
murderess.  Placards were posted by unknown hands in the public 
places denouncing Bothwell as the murderer, and the Queen as his 
accomplice; and, when he afterwards married her (though himself 
already married), previously making a show of taking her prisoner 
by force, the indignation of the people knew no bounds.  The women 
particularly are described as having been quite frantic against the 
Queen, and to have hooted and cried after her in the streets with 
terrific vehemence.

Such guilty unions seldom prosper.  This husband and wife had lived 
together but a month, when they were separated for ever by the 
successes of a band of Scotch nobles who associated against them 
for the protection of the young Prince:  whom Bothwell had vainly 
endeavoured to lay hold of, and whom he would certainly have 
murdered, if the EARL OF MAR, in whose hands the boy was, had not 
been firmly and honourably faithful to his trust.  Before this 
angry power, Bothwell fled abroad, where he died, a prisoner and 
mad, nine miserable years afterwards.  Mary being found by the 
associated lords to deceive them at every turn, was sent a prisoner 
to Lochleven Castle; which, as it stood in the midst of a lake, 
could only be approached by boat.  Here, one LORD LINDSAY, who was 
so much of a brute that the nobles would have done better if they 
had chosen a mere gentleman for their messenger, made her sign her 
abdication, and appoint Murray, Regent of Scotland.  Here, too, 
Murray saw her in a sorrowing and humbled state.

She had better have remained in the castle of Lochleven, dull 
prison as it was, with the rippling of the lake against it, and the 
moving shadows of the water on the room walls; but she could not 
rest there, and more than once tried to escape.  The first time she 
had nearly succeeded, dressed in the clothes of her own washer-
woman, but, putting up her hand to prevent one of the boatmen from 
lifting her veil, the men suspected her, seeing how white it was, 
and rowed her back again.  A short time afterwards, her fascinating 
manners enlisted in her cause a boy in the Castle, called the 
little DOUGLAS, who, while the family were at supper, stole the 
keys of the great gate, went softly out with the Queen, locked the 
gate on the outside, and rowed her away across the lake, sinking 
the keys as they went along.  On the opposite shore she was met by 
another Douglas, and some few lords; and, so accompanied, rode away 
on horseback to Hamilton, where they raised three thousand men.  
Here, she issued a proclamation declaring that the abdication she 
had signed in her prison was illegal, and requiring the Regent to 
yield to his lawful Queen.  Being a steady soldier, and in no way 
discomposed although he was without an army, Murray pretended to 
treat with her, until he had collected a force about half equal to 
her own, and then he gave her battle.  In one quarter of an hour he 
cut down all her hopes.  She had another weary ride on horse-back 
of sixty long Scotch miles, and took shelter at Dundrennan Abbey, 
whence she fled for safety to Elizabeth's dominions.

Mary Queen of Scots came to England - to her own ruin, the trouble 
of the kingdom, and the misery and death of many - in the year one 
thousand five hundred and sixty-eight.  How she left it and the 
world, nineteen years afterwards, we have now to see.


SECOND PART


WHEN Mary Queen of Scots arrived in England, without money and even 
without any other clothes than those she wore, she wrote to 
Elizabeth, representing herself as an innocent and injured piece of 
Royalty, and entreating her assistance to oblige her Scottish 
subjects to take her back again and obey her.  But, as her 
character was already known in England to be a very different one 
from what she made it out to be, she was told in answer that she 
must first clear herself.  Made uneasy by this condition, Mary, 
rather than stay in England, would have gone to Spain, or to 
France, or would even have gone back to Scotland.  But, as her 
doing either would have been likely to trouble England afresh, it 
was decided that she should be detained here.  She first came to 
Carlisle, and, after that, was moved about from castle to castle, 
as was considered necessary; but England she never left again.

After trying very hard to get rid of the necessity of clearing 
herself, Mary, advised by LORD HERRIES, her best friend in England, 
agreed to answer the charges against her, if the Scottish noblemen 
who made them would attend to maintain them before such English 
noblemen as Elizabeth might appoint for that purpose.  Accordingly, 
such an assembly, under the name of a conference, met, first at 
York, and afterwards at Hampton Court.  In its presence Lord 
Lennox, Darnley's father, openly charged Mary with the murder of 
his son; and whatever Mary's friends may now say or write in her 
behalf, there is no doubt that, when her brother Murray produced 
against her a casket containing certain guilty letters and verses 
which he stated to have passed between her and Bothwell, she 
withdrew from the inquiry.  Consequently, it is to be supposed that 
she was then considered guilty by those who had the best 
opportunities of judging of the truth, and that the feeling which 
afterwards arose in her behalf was a very generous but not a very 
reasonable one.

However, the DUKE OF NORFOLK, an honourable but rather weak 
nobleman, partly because Mary was captivating, partly because he 
was ambitious, partly because he was over-persuaded by artful 
plotters against Elizabeth, conceived a strong idea that he would 
like to marry the Queen of Scots - though he was a little 
frightened, too, by the letters in the casket.  This idea being 
secretly encouraged by some of the noblemen of Elizabeth's court, 
and even by the favourite Earl of Leicester (because it was 
objected to by other favourites who were his rivals), Mary 
expressed her approval of it, and the King of France and the King 
of Spain are supposed to have done the same.  It was not so quietly 
planned, though, but that it came to Elizabeth's ears, who warned 
the Duke 'to be careful what sort of pillow he was going to lay his 
head upon.'  He made a humble reply at the time; but turned sulky 
soon afterwards, and, being considered dangerous, was sent to the 
Tower.

Thus, from the moment of Mary's coming to England she began to be 
the centre of plots and miseries.

A rise of the Catholics in the north was the next of these, and it 
was only checked by many executions and much bloodshed.  It was 
followed by a great conspiracy of the Pope and some of the Catholic 
sovereigns of Europe to depose Elizabeth, place Mary on the throne, 
and restore the unreformed religion.  It is almost impossible to 
doubt that Mary knew and approved of this; and the Pope himself was 
so hot in the matter that he issued a bull, in which he openly 
called Elizabeth the 'pretended Queen' of England, excommunicated 
her, and excommunicated all her subjects who should continue to 
obey her.  A copy of this miserable paper got into London, and was 
found one morning publicly posted on the Bishop of London's gate.  
A great hue and cry being raised, another copy was found in the 
chamber of a student of Lincoln's Inn, who confessed, being put 
upon the rack, that he had received it from one JOHN FELTON, a rich 
gentleman who lived across the Thames, near Southwark.  This John 
Felton, being put upon the rack too, confessed that he had posted 
the placard on the Bishop's gate.  For this offence he was, within 
four days, taken to St. Paul's Churchyard, and there hanged and 
quartered.  As to the Pope's bull, the people by the reformation 
having thrown off the Pope, did not care much, you may suppose, for 
the Pope's throwing off them.  It was a mere dirty piece of paper, 
and not half so powerful as a street ballad.

On the very day when Felton was brought to his trial, the poor Duke 
of Norfolk was released.  It would have been well for him if he had 
kept away from the Tower evermore, and from the snares that had 
taken him there.  But, even while he was in that dismal place he 
corresponded with Mary, and as soon as he was out of it, he began 
to plot again.  Being discovered in correspondence with the Pope, 
with a view to a rising in England which should force Elizabeth to 
consent to his marriage with Mary and to repeal the laws against 
the Catholics, he was re-committed to the Tower and brought to 
trial.  He was found guilty by the unanimous verdict of the Lords 
who tried him, and was sentenced to the block.

It is very difficult to make out, at this distance of time, and 
between opposite accounts, whether Elizabeth really was a humane 
woman, or desired to appear so, or was fearful of shedding the 
blood of people of great name who were popular in the country.  
Twice she commanded and countermanded the execution of this Duke, 
and it did not take place until five months after his trial.  The 
scaffold was erected on Tower Hill, and there he died like a brave 
man.  He refused to have his eyes bandaged, saying that he was not 
at all afraid of death; and he admitted the justice of his 
sentence, and was much regretted by the people.

Although Mary had shrunk at the most important time from disproving 
her guilt, she was very careful never to do anything that would 
admit it.  All such proposals as were made to her by Elizabeth for 
her release, required that admission in some form or other, and 
therefore came to nothing.  Moreover, both women being artful and 
treacherous, and neither ever trusting the other, it was not likely 
that they could ever make an agreement.  So, the Parliament, 
aggravated by what the Pope had done, made new and strong laws 
against the spreading of the Catholic religion in England, and 
declared it treason in any one to say that the Queen and her 
successors were not the lawful sovereigns of England.  It would 
have done more than this, but for Elizabeth's moderation.

Since the Reformation, there had come to be three great sects of 
religious people - or people who called themselves so - in England; 
that is to say, those who belonged to the Reformed Church, those 
who belonged to the Unreformed Church, and those who were called 
the Puritans, because they said that they wanted to have everything 
very pure and plain in all the Church service.  These last were for 
the most part an uncomfortable people, who thought it highly 
meritorious to dress in a hideous manner, talk through their noses, 
and oppose all harmless enjoyments.  But they were powerful too, 
and very much in earnest, and they were one and all the determined 
enemies of the Queen of Scots.  The Protestant feeling in England 
was further strengthened by the tremendous cruelties to which 
Protestants were exposed in France and in the Netherlands.  Scores 
of thousands of them were put to death in those countries with 
every cruelty that can be imagined, and at last, in the autumn of 
the year one thousand five hundred and seventy-two, one of the 
greatest barbarities ever committed in the world took place at 
Paris.

It is called in history, THE MASSACRE OF SAINT BARTHOLOMEW, because 
it took place on Saint Bartholomew's Eve.  The day fell on Saturday 
the twenty-third of August.  On that day all the great leaders of 
the Protestants (who were there called HUGUENOTS) were assembled 
together, for the purpose, as was represented to them, of doing 
honour to the marriage of their chief, the young King of Navarre, 
with the sister of CHARLES THE NINTH:  a miserable young King who 
then occupied the French throne.  This dull creature was made to 
believe by his mother and other fierce Catholics about him that the 
Huguenots meant to take his life; and he was persuaded to give 
secret orders that, on the tolling of a great bell, they should be 
fallen upon by an overpowering force of armed men, and slaughtered 
wherever they could be found.  When the appointed hour was close at 
hand, the stupid wretch, trembling from head to foot, was taken 
into a balcony by his mother to see the atrocious work begun.  The 
moment the bell tolled, the murderers broke forth.  During all that 
night and the two next days, they broke into the houses, fired the 
houses, shot and stabbed the Protestants, men, women, and children, 
and flung their bodies into the streets.  They were shot at in the 
streets as they passed along, and their blood ran down the gutters.  
Upwards of ten thousand Protestants were killed in Paris alone; in 
all France four or five times that number.  To return thanks to 
Heaven for these diabolical murders, the Pope and his train 
actually went in public procession at Rome, and as if this were not 
shame enough for them, they had a medal struck to commemorate the 
event.  But, however comfortable the wholesale murders were to 
these high authorities, they had not that soothing effect upon the 
doll-King.  I am happy to state that he never knew a moment's peace 
afterwards; that he was continually crying out that he saw the 
Huguenots covered with blood and wounds falling dead before him; 
and that he died within a year, shrieking and yelling and raving to 
that degree, that if all the Popes who had ever lived had been 
rolled into one, they would not have afforded His guilty Majesty 
the slightest consolation.

When the terrible news of the massacre arrived in England, it made 
a powerful impression indeed upon the people.  If they began to run 
a little wild against the Catholics at about this time, this 
fearful reason for it, coming so soon after the days of bloody 
Queen Mary, must be remembered in their excuse.  The Court was not 
quite so honest as the people - but perhaps it sometimes is not.  
It received the French ambassador, with all the lords and ladies 
dressed in deep mourning, and keeping a profound silence.  
Nevertheless, a proposal of marriage which he had made to Elizabeth 
only two days before the eve of Saint Bartholomew, on behalf of the 
Duke of Alenon, the French King's brother, a boy of seventeen, 
still went on; while on the other hand, in her usual crafty way, 
the Queen secretly supplied the Huguenots with money and weapons.

I must say that for a Queen who made all those fine speeches, of 
which I have confessed myself to be rather tired, about living and 
dying a Maiden Queen, Elizabeth was 'going' to be married pretty 
often.  Besides always having some English favourite or other whom 
she by turns encouraged and swore at and knocked about - for the 
maiden Queen was very free with her fists - she held this French 
Duke off and on through several years.  When he at last came over 
to England, the marriage articles were actually drawn up, and it 
was settled that the wedding should take place in six weeks.  The 
Queen was then so bent upon it, that she prosecuted a poor Puritan 
named STUBBS, and a poor bookseller named PAGE, for writing and 
publishing a pamphlet against it.  Their right hands were chopped 
off for this crime; and poor Stubbs - more loyal than I should have 
been myself under the circumstances - immediately pulled off his 
hat with his left hand, and cried, 'God save the Queen!'  Stubbs 
was cruelly treated; for the marriage never took place after all, 
though the Queen pledged herself to the Duke with a ring from her 
own finger.  He went away, no better than he came, when the 
courtship had lasted some ten years altogether; and he died a 
couple of years afterwards, mourned by Elizabeth, who appears to 
have been really fond of him.  It is not much to her credit, for he 
was a bad enough member of a bad family.

To return to the Catholics.  There arose two orders of priests, who 
were very busy in England, and who were much dreaded.  These were 
the JESUITS (who were everywhere in all sorts of disguises), and 
the SEMINARY PRIESTS.  The people had a great horror of the first, 
because they were known to have taught that murder was lawful if it 
were done with an object of which they approved; and they had a 
great horror of the second, because they came to teach the old 
religion, and to be the successors of 'Queen Mary's priests,' as 
those yet lingering in England were called, when they should die 
out.  The severest laws were made against them, and were most 
unmercifully executed.  Those who sheltered them in their houses 
often suffered heavily for what was an act of humanity; and the 
rack, that cruel torture which tore men's limbs asunder, was 
constantly kept going.  What these unhappy men confessed, or what 
was ever confessed by any one under that agony, must always be 
received with great doubt, as it is certain that people have 
frequently owned to the most absurd and impossible crimes to escape 
such dreadful suffering.  But I cannot doubt it to have been proved 
by papers, that there were many plots, both among the Jesuits, and 
with France, and with Scotland, and with Spain, for the destruction 
of Queen Elizabeth, for the placing of Mary on the throne, and for 
the revival of the old religion.

If the English people were too ready to believe in plots, there 
were, as I have said, good reasons for it.  When the massacre of 
Saint Bartholomew was yet fresh in their recollection, a great 
Protestant Dutch hero, the PRINCE OF ORANGE, was shot by an 
assassin, who confessed that he had been kept and trained for the 
purpose in a college of Jesuits.  The Dutch, in this surprise and 
distress, offered to make Elizabeth their sovereign, but she 
declined the honour, and sent them a small army instead, under the 
command of the Earl of Leicester, who, although a capital Court 
favourite, was not much of a general.  He did so little in Holland, 
that his campaign there would probably have been forgotten, but for 
its occasioning the death of one of the best writers, the best 
knights, and the best gentlemen, of that or any age.  This was SIR 
PHILIP SIDNEY, who was wounded by a musket ball in the thigh as he 
mounted a fresh horse, after having had his own killed under him.  
He had to ride back wounded, a long distance, and was very faint 
with fatigue and loss of blood, when some water, for which he had 
eagerly asked, was handed to him.  But he was so good and gentle 
even then, that seeing a poor badly wounded common soldier lying on 
the ground, looking at the water with longing eyes, he said, 'Thy 
necessity is greater than mine,' and gave it up to him.  This 
touching action of a noble heart is perhaps as well known as any 
incident in history - is as famous far and wide as the blood-
stained Tower of London, with its axe, and block, and murders out 
of number.  So delightful is an act of true humanity, and so glad 
are mankind to remember it.

At home, intelligence of plots began to thicken every day.  I 
suppose the people never did live under such continual terrors as 
those by which they were possessed now, of Catholic risings, and 
burnings, and poisonings, and I don't know what.  Still, we must 
always remember that they lived near and close to awful realities 
of that kind, and that with their experience it was not difficult 
to believe in any enormity.  The government had the same fear, and 
did not take the best means of discovering the truth - for, besides 
torturing the suspected, it employed paid spies, who will always 
lie for their own profit.  It even made some of the conspiracies it 
brought to light, by sending false letters to disaffected people, 
inviting them to join in pretended plots, which they too readily 
did.

But, one great real plot was at length discovered, and it ended the 
career of Mary, Queen of Scots.  A seminary priest named BALLARD, 
and a Spanish soldier named SAVAGE, set on and encouraged by 
certain French priests, imparted a design to one ANTONY BABINGTON - 
a gentleman of fortune in Derbyshire, who had been for some time a 
secret agent of Mary's - for murdering the Queen.  Babington then 
confided the scheme to some other Catholic gentlemen who were his 
friends, and they joined in it heartily.  They were vain, weak-
headed young men, ridiculously confident, and preposterously proud 
of their plan; for they got a gimcrack painting made, of the six 
choice spirits who were to murder Elizabeth, with Babington in an 
attitude for the centre figure.  Two of their number, however, one 
of whom was a priest, kept Elizabeth's wisest minister, SIR FRANCIS 
WALSINGHAM, acquainted with the whole project from the first.  The 
conspirators were completely deceived to the final point, when 
Babington gave Savage, because he was shabby, a ring from his 
finger, and some money from his purse, wherewith to buy himself new 
clothes in which to kill the Queen.  Walsingham, having then full 
evidence against the whole band, and two letters of Mary's besides, 
resolved to seize them.  Suspecting something wrong, they stole out 
of the city, one by one, and hid themselves in St. John's Wood, and 
other places which really were hiding places then; but they were 
all taken, and all executed.  When they were seized, a gentleman 
was sent from Court to inform Mary of the fact, and of her being 
involved in the discovery.  Her friends have complained that she 
was kept in very hard and severe custody.  It does not appear very 
likely, for she was going out a hunting that very morning.

Queen Elizabeth had been warned long ago, by one in France who had 
good information of what was secretly doing, that in holding Mary 
alive, she held 'the wolf who would devour her.'  The Bishop of 
London had, more lately, given the Queen's favourite minister the 
advice in writing, 'forthwith to cut off the Scottish Queen's 
head.'  The question now was, what to do with her?  The Earl of 
Leicester wrote a little note home from Holland, recommending that 
she should be quietly poisoned; that noble favourite having 
accustomed his mind, it is possible, to remedies of that nature.  
His black advice, however, was disregarded, and she was brought to 
trial at Fotheringay Castle in Northamptonshire, before a tribunal 
of forty, composed of both religions.  There, and in the Star 
Chamber at Westminster, the trial lasted a fortnight.  She defended 
herself with great ability, but could only deny the confessions 
that had been made by Babington and others; could only call her own 
letters, produced against her by her own secretaries, forgeries; 
and, in short, could only deny everything.  She was found guilty, 
and declared to have incurred the penalty of death.  The Parliament 
met, approved the sentence, and prayed the Queen to have it 
executed.  The Queen replied that she requested them to consider 
whether no means could be found of saving Mary's life without 
endangering her own.  The Parliament rejoined, No; and the citizens 
illuminated their houses and lighted bonfires, in token of their 
joy that all these plots and troubles were to be ended by the death 
of the Queen of Scots.

She, feeling sure that her time was now come, wrote a letter to the 
Queen of England, making three entreaties; first, that she might be 
buried in France; secondly, that she might not be executed in 
secret, but before her servants and some others; thirdly, that 
after her death, her servants should not be molested, but should be 
suffered to go home with the legacies she left them.  It was an 
affecting letter, and Elizabeth shed tears over it, but sent no 
answer.  Then came a special ambassador from France, and another 
from Scotland, to intercede for Mary's life; and then the nation 
began to clamour, more and more, for her death.

What the real feelings or intentions of Elizabeth were, can never 
be known now; but I strongly suspect her of only wishing one thing 
more than Mary's death, and that was to keep free of the blame of 
it.  On the first of February, one thousand five hundred and 
eighty-seven, Lord Burleigh having drawn out the warrant for the 
execution, the Queen sent to the secretary DAVISON to bring it to 
her, that she might sign it:  which she did.  Next day, when 
Davison told her it was sealed, she angrily asked him why such 
haste was necessary?  Next day but one, she joked about it, and 
swore a little.  Again, next day but one, she seemed to complain 
that it was not yet done, but still she would not be plain with 
those about her.  So, on the seventh, the Earls of Kent and 
Shrewsbury, with the Sheriff of Northamptonshire, came with the 
warrant to Fotheringay, to tell the Queen of Scots to prepare for 
death.

When those messengers of ill omen were gone, Mary made a frugal 
supper, drank to her servants, read over her will, went to bed, 
slept for some hours, and then arose and passed the remainder of 
the night saying prayers.  In the morning she dressed herself in 
her best clothes; and, at eight o'clock when the sheriff came for 
her to her chapel, took leave of her servants who were there 
assembled praying with her, and went down-stairs, carrying a Bible 
in one hand and a crucifix in the other.  Two of her women and four 
of her men were allowed to be present in the hall; where a low 
scaffold, only two feet from the ground, was erected and covered 
with black; and where the executioner from the Tower, and his 
assistant, stood, dressed in black velvet.  The hall was full of 
people.  While the sentence was being read she sat upon a stool; 
and, when it was finished, she again denied her guilt, as she had 
done before.  The Earl of Kent and the Dean of Peterborough, in 
their Protestant zeal, made some very unnecessary speeches to her; 
to which she replied that she died in the Catholic religion, and 
they need not trouble themselves about that matter.  When her head 
and neck were uncovered by the executioners, she said that she had 
not been used to be undressed by such hands, or before so much 
company.  Finally, one of her women fastened a cloth over her face, 
and she laid her neck upon the block, and repeated more than once 
in Latin, 'Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit!'  Some say 
her head was struck off in two blows, some say in three.  However 
that be, when it was held up, streaming with blood, the real hair 
beneath the false hair she had long worn was seen to be as grey as 
that of a woman of seventy, though she was at that time only in her 
forty-sixth year.  All her beauty was gone.

But she was beautiful enough to her little dog, who cowered under 
her dress, frightened, when she went upon the scaffold, and who lay 
down beside her headless body when all her earthly sorrows were 
over.


THIRD PART


ON its being formally made known to Elizabeth that the sentence had 
been executed on the Queen of Scots, she showed the utmost grief 
and rage, drove her favourites from her with violent indignation, 
and sent Davison to the Tower; from which place he was only 
released in the end by paying an immense fine which completely 
ruined him.  Elizabeth not only over-acted her part in making these 
pretences, but most basely reduced to poverty one of her faithful 
servants for no other fault than obeying her commands.

James, King of Scotland, Mary's son, made a show likewise of being 
very angry on the occasion; but he was a pensioner of England to 
the amount of five thousand pounds a year, and he had known very 
little of his mother, and he possibly regarded her as the murderer 
of his father, and he soon took it quietly.

Philip, King of Spain, however, threatened to do greater things 
than ever had been done yet, to set up the Catholic religion and 
punish Protestant England.  Elizabeth, hearing that he and the 
Prince of Parma were making great preparations for this purpose, in 
order to be beforehand with them sent out ADMIRAL DRAKE (a famous 
navigator, who had sailed about the world, and had already brought 
great plunder from Spain) to the port of Cadiz, where he burnt a 
hundred vessels full of stores.  This great loss obliged the 
Spaniards to put off the invasion for a year; but it was none the 
less formidable for that, amounting to one hundred and thirty 
ships, nineteen thousand soldiers, eight thousand sailors, two 
thousand slaves, and between two and three thousand great guns.  
England was not idle in making ready to resist this great force.  
All the men between sixteen years old and sixty, were trained and 
drilled; the national fleet of ships (in number only thirty-four at 
first) was enlarged by public contributions and by private ships, 
fitted out by noblemen; the city of London, of its own accord, 
furnished double the number of ships and men that it was required 
to provide; and, if ever the national spirit was up in England, it 
was up all through the country to resist the Spaniards.  Some of 
the Queen's advisers were for seizing the principal English 
Catholics, and putting them to death; but the Queen - who, to her 
honour, used to say, that she would never believe any ill of her 
subjects, which a parent would not believe of her own children - 
rejected the advice, and only confined a few of those who were the 
most suspected, in the fens in Lincolnshire.  The great body of 
Catholics deserved this confidence; for they behaved most loyally, 
nobly, and bravely.

So, with all England firing up like one strong, angry man, and with 
both sides of the Thames fortified, and with the soldiers under 
arms, and with the sailors in their ships, the country waited for 
the coming of the proud Spanish fleet, which was called THE 
INVINCIBLE ARMADA.  The Queen herself, riding in armour on a white 
horse, and the Earl of Essex and the Earl of Leicester holding her 
bridal rein, made a brave speech to the troops at Tilbury Fort 
opposite Gravesend, which was received with such enthusiasm as is 
seldom known.  Then came the Spanish Armada into the English 
Channel, sailing along in the form of a half moon, of such great 
size that it was seven miles broad.  But the English were quickly 
upon it, and woe then to all the Spanish ships that dropped a 
little out of the half moon, for the English took them instantly!  
And it soon appeared that the great Armada was anything but 
invincible, for on a summer night, bold Drake sent eight blazing 
fire-ships right into the midst of it.  In terrible consternation 
the Spaniards tried to get out to sea, and so became dispersed; the 
English pursued them at a great advantage; a storm came on, and 
drove the Spaniards among rocks and shoals; and the swift end of 
the Invincible fleet was, that it lost thirty great ships and ten 
thousand men, and, defeated and disgraced, sailed home again.  
Being afraid to go by the English Channel, it sailed all round 
Scotland and Ireland; some of the ships getting cast away on the 
latter coast in bad weather, the Irish, who were a kind of savages, 
plundered those vessels and killed their crews.  So ended this 
great attempt to invade and conquer England.  And I think it will 
be a long time before any other invincible fleet coming to England 
with the same object, will fare much better than the Spanish 
Armada.

Though the Spanish king had had this bitter taste of English 
bravery, he was so little the wiser for it, as still to entertain 
his old designs, and even to conceive the absurd idea of placing 
his daughter on the English throne.  But the Earl of Essex, SIR 
WALTER RALEIGH, SIR THOMAS HOWARD, and some other distinguished 
leaders, put to sea from Plymouth, entered the port of Cadiz once 
more, obtained a complete victory over the shipping assembled 
there, and got possession of the town.  In obedience to the Queen's 
express instructions, they behaved with great humanity; and the 
principal loss of the Spaniards was a vast sum of money which they 
had to pay for ransom.  This was one of many gallant achievements 
on the sea, effected in this reign.  Sir Walter Raleigh himself, 
after marrying a maid of honour and giving offence to the Maiden 
Queen thereby, had already sailed to South America in search of 
gold.

The Earl of Leicester was now dead, and so was Sir Thomas 
Walsingham, whom Lord Burleigh was soon to follow.  The principal 
favourite was the EARL OF ESSEX, a spirited and handsome man, a 
favourite with the people too as well as with the Queen, and 
possessed of many admirable qualities.  It was much debated at 
Court whether there should be peace with Spain or no, and he was 
very urgent for war.  He also tried hard to have his own way in the 
appointment of a deputy to govern in Ireland.  One day, while this 
question was in dispute, he hastily took offence, and turned his 
back upon the Queen; as a gentle reminder of which impropriety, the 
Queen gave him a tremendous box on the ear, and told him to go to 
the devil.  He went home instead, and did not reappear at Court for 
half a year or so, when he and the Queen were reconciled, though 
never (as some suppose) thoroughly.

From this time the fate of the Earl of Essex and that of the Queen 
seemed to be blended together.  The Irish were still perpetually 
quarrelling and fighting among themselves, and he went over to 
Ireland as Lord Lieutenant, to the great joy of his enemies (Sir 
Walter Raleigh among the rest), who were glad to have so dangerous 
a rival far off.  Not being by any means successful there, and 
knowing that his enemies would take advantage of that circumstance 
to injure him with the Queen, he came home again, though against 
her orders.  The Queen being taken by surprise when he appeared 
before her, gave him her hand to kiss, and he was overjoyed - 
though it was not a very lovely hand by this time - but in the 
course of the same day she ordered him to confine himself to his 
room, and two or three days afterwards had him taken into custody.  
With the same sort of caprice - and as capricious an old woman she 
now was, as ever wore a crown or a head either - she sent him broth 
from her own table on his falling ill from anxiety, and cried about 
him.

He was a man who could find comfort and occupation in his books, 
and he did so for a time; not the least happy time, I dare say, of 
his life.  But it happened unfortunately for him, that he held a 
monopoly in sweet wines:  which means that nobody could sell them 
without purchasing his permission.  This right, which was only for 
a term, expiring, he applied to have it renewed.  The Queen 
refused, with the rather strong observation - but she DID make 
strong observations - that an unruly beast must be stinted in his 
food.  Upon this, the angry Earl, who had been already deprived of 
many offices, thought himself in danger of complete ruin, and 
turned against the Queen, whom he called a vain old woman who had 
grown as crooked in her mind as she had in her figure.  These 
uncomplimentary expressions the ladies of the Court immediately 
snapped up and carried to the Queen, whom they did not put in a 
better tempter, you may believe.  The same Court ladies, when they 
had beautiful dark hair of their own, used to wear false red hair, 
to be like the Queen.  So they were not very high-spirited ladies, 
however high in rank.

The worst object of the Earl of Essex, and some friends of his who 
used to meet at LORD SOUTHAMPTON'S house, was to obtain possession 
of the Queen, and oblige her by force to dismiss her ministers and 
change her favourites.  On Saturday the seventh of February, one 
thousand six hundred and one, the council suspecting this, summoned 
the Earl to come before them.  He, pretending to be ill, declined; 
it was then settled among his friends, that as the next day would 
be Sunday, when many of the citizens usually assembled at the Cross 
by St. Paul's Cathedral, he should make one bold effort to induce 
them to rise and follow him to the Palace.

So, on the Sunday morning, he and a small body of adherents started 
out of his house - Essex House by the Strand, with steps to the 
river - having first shut up in it, as prisoners, some members of 
the council who came to examine him - and hurried into the City 
with the Earl at their head crying out 'For the Queen!  For the 
Queen!  A plot is laid for my life!'  No one heeded them, however, 
and when they came to St. Paul's there were no citizens there.  In 
the meantime the prisoners at Essex House had been released by one 
of the Earl's own friends; he had been promptly proclaimed a 
traitor in the City itself; and the streets were barricaded with 
carts and guarded by soldiers.  The Earl got back to his house by 
water, with difficulty, and after an attempt to defend his house 
against the troops and cannon by which it was soon surrounded, gave 
himself up that night.  He was brought to trial on the nineteenth, 
and found guilty; on the twenty-fifth, he was executed on Tower 
Hill, where he died, at thirty-four years old, both courageously 
and penitently.  His step-father suffered with him.  His enemy, Sir 
Walter Raleigh, stood near the scaffold all the time - but not so 
near it as we shall see him stand, before we finish his history.

In this case, as in the cases of the Duke of Norfolk and Mary Queen 
of Scots, the Queen had commanded, and countermanded, and again 
commanded, the execution.  It is probable that the death of her 
young and gallant favourite in the prime of his good qualities, was 
never off her mind afterwards, but she held out, the same vain, 
obstinate and capricious woman, for another year.  Then she danced 
before her Court on a state occasion - and cut, I should think, a 
mighty ridiculous figure, doing so in an immense ruff, stomacher 
and wig, at seventy years old.  For another year still, she held 
out, but, without any more dancing, and as a moody, sorrowful, 
broken creature.  At last, on the tenth of March, one thousand six 
hundred and three, having been ill of a very bad cold, and made 
worse by the death of the Countess of Nottingham who was her 
intimate friend, she fell into a stupor and was supposed to be 
dead.  She recovered her consciousness, however, and then nothing 
would induce her to go to bed; for she said that she knew that if 
she did, she should never get up again.  There she lay for ten 
days, on cushions on the floor, without any food, until the Lord 
Admiral got her into bed at last, partly by persuasions and partly 
by main force.  When they asked her who should succeed her, she 
replied that her seat had been the seat of Kings, and that she 
would have for her successor, 'No rascal's son, but a King's.'  
Upon this, the lords present stared at one another, and took the 
liberty of asking whom she meant; to which she replied, 'Whom 
should I mean, but our cousin of Scotland!'  This was on the 
twenty-third of March.  They asked her once again that day, after 
she was speechless, whether she was still in the same mind?  She 
struggled up in bed, and joined her hands over her head in the form 
of a crown, as the only reply she could make.  At three o'clock 
next morning, she very quietly died, in the forty-fifth year of her 
reign.

That reign had been a glorious one, and is made for ever memorable 
by the distinguished men who flourished in it.  Apart from the 
great voyagers, statesmen, and scholars, whom it produced, the 
names of BACON, SPENSER, and SHAKESPEARE, will always be remembered 
with pride and veneration by the civilised world, and will always 
impart (though with no great reason, perhaps) some portion of their 
lustre to the name of Elizabeth herself.  It was a great reign for 
discovery, for commerce, and for English enterprise and spirit in 
general.  It was a great reign for the Protestant religion and for 
the Reformation which made England free.  The Queen was very 
popular, and in her progresses, or journeys about her dominions, 
was everywhere received with the liveliest joy.  I think the truth 
is, that she was not half so good as she has been made out, and not 
half so bad as she has been made out.  She had her fine qualities, 
but she was coarse, capricious, and treacherous, and had all the 
faults of an excessively vain young woman long after she was an old 
one.  On the whole, she had a great deal too much of her father in 
her, to please me.

Many improvements and luxuries were introduced in the course of 
these five-and-forty years in the general manner of living; but 
cock-fighting, bull-baiting, and bear-baiting, were still the 
national amusements; and a coach was so rarely seen, and was such 
an ugly and cumbersome affair when it was seen, that even the Queen 
herself, on many high occasions, rode on horseback on a pillion 
behind the Lord Chancellor.



CHAPTER XXXII - ENGLAND UNDER JAMES THE FIRST



'OUR cousin of Scotland' was ugly, awkward, and shuffling both in 
mind and person.  His tongue was much too large for his mouth, his 
legs were much too weak for his body, and his dull goggle-eyes 
stared and rolled like an idiot's.  He was cunning, covetous, 
wasteful, idle, drunken, greedy, dirty, cowardly, a great swearer, 
and the most conceited man on earth.  His figure - what is commonly 
called rickety from his birth - presented a most ridiculous 
appearance, dressed in thick padded clothes, as a safeguard against 
being stabbed (of which he lived in continual fear), of a grass-
green colour from head to foot, with a hunting-horn dangling at his 
side instead of a sword, and his hat and feather sticking over one 
eye, or hanging on the back of his head, as he happened to toss it 
on.  He used to loll on the necks of his favourite courtiers, and 
slobber their faces, and kiss and pinch their cheeks; and the 
greatest favourite he ever had, used to sign himself in his letters 
to his royal master, His Majesty's 'dog and slave,' and used to 
address his majesty as 'his Sowship.'  His majesty was the worst 
rider ever seen, and thought himself the best.  He was one of the 
most impertinent talkers (in the broadest Scotch) ever heard, and 
boasted of being unanswerable in all manner of argument.  He wrote 
some of the most wearisome treatises ever read - among others, a 
book upon witchcraft, in which he was a devout believer - and 
thought himself a prodigy of authorship.  He thought, and wrote, 
and said, that a king had a right to make and unmake what laws he 
pleased, and ought to be accountable to nobody on earth.  This is 
the plain, true character of the personage whom the greatest men 
about the court praised and flattered to that degree, that I doubt 
if there be anything much more shameful in the annals of human 
nature.

He came to the English throne with great ease.  The miseries of a 
disputed succession had been felt so long, and so dreadfully, that 
he was proclaimed within a few hours of Elizabeth's death, and was 
accepted by the nation, even without being asked to give any pledge 
that he would govern well, or that he would redress crying 
grievances.  He took a month to come from Edinburgh to London; and, 
by way of exercising his new power, hanged a pickpocket on the 
journey without any trial, and knighted everybody he could lay hold 
of.  He made two hundred knights before he got to his palace in 
London, and seven hundred before he had been in it three months.  
He also shovelled sixty-two new peers into the House of Lords - and 
there was a pretty large sprinkling of Scotchmen among them, you 
may believe.

His Sowship's prime Minister, CECIL (for I cannot do better than 
call his majesty what his favourite called him), was the enemy of 
Sir Walter Raleigh, and also of Sir Walter's political friend, LORD 
COBHAM; and his Sowship's first trouble was a plot originated by 
these two, and entered into by some others, with the old object of 
seizing the King and keeping him in imprisonment until he should 
change his ministers.  There were Catholic priests in the plot, and 
there were Puritan noblemen too; for, although the Catholics and 
Puritans were strongly opposed to each other, they united at this 
time against his Sowship, because they knew that he had a design 
against both, after pretending to be friendly to each; this design 
being to have only one high and convenient form of the Protestant 
religion, which everybody should be bound to belong to, whether 
they liked it or not.  This plot was mixed up with another, which 
may or may not have had some reference to placing on the throne, at 
some time, the LADY ARABELLA STUART; whose misfortune it was, to be 
the daughter of the younger brother of his Sowship's father, but 
who was quite innocent of any part in the scheme.  Sir Walter 
Raleigh was accused on the confession of Lord Cobham - a miserable 
creature, who said one thing at one time, and another thing at 
another time, and could be relied upon in nothing.  The trial of 
Sir Walter Raleigh lasted from eight in the morning until nearly 
midnight; he defended himself with such eloquence, genius, and 
spirit against all accusations, and against the insults of COKE, 
the Attorney-General - who, according to the custom of the time, 
foully abused him - that those who went there detesting the 
prisoner, came away admiring him, and declaring that anything so 
wonderful and so captivating was never heard.  He was found guilty, 
nevertheless, and sentenced to death.  Execution was deferred, and 
he was taken to the Tower.  The two Catholic priests, less 
fortunate, were executed with the usual atrocity; and Lord Cobham 
and two others were pardoned on the scaffold.  His Sowship thought 
it wonderfully knowing in him to surprise the people by pardoning 
these three at the very block; but, blundering, and bungling, as 
usual, he had very nearly overreached himself.  For, the messenger 
on horseback who brought the pardon, came so late, that he was 
pushed to the outside of the crowd, and was obliged to shout and 
roar out what he came for.  The miserable Cobham did not gain much 
by being spared that day.  He lived, both as a prisoner and a 
beggar, utterly despised, and miserably poor, for thirteen years, 
and then died in an old outhouse belonging to one of his former 
servants.

This plot got rid of, and Sir Walter Raleigh safely shut up in the 
Tower, his Sowship held a great dispute with the Puritans on their 
presenting a petition to him, and had it all his own way - not so 
very wonderful, as he would talk continually, and would not hear 
anybody else - and filled the Bishops with admiration.  It was 
comfortably settled that there was to be only one form of religion, 
and that all men were to think exactly alike.  But, although this 
was arranged two centuries and a half ago, and although the 
arrangement was supported by much fining and imprisonment, I do not 
find that it is quite successful, even yet.

His Sowship, having that uncommonly high opinion of himself as a 
king, had a very low opinion of Parliament as a power that 
audaciously wanted to control him.  When he called his first 
Parliament after he had been king a year, he accordingly thought he 
would take pretty high ground with them, and told them that he 
commanded them 'as an absolute king.'  The Parliament thought those 
strong words, and saw the necessity of upholding their authority.  
His Sowship had three children:  Prince Henry, Prince Charles, and 
the Princess Elizabeth.  It would have been well for one of these, 
and we shall too soon see which, if he had learnt a little wisdom 
concerning Parliaments from his father's obstinacy.

Now, the people still labouring under their old dread of the 
Catholic religion, this Parliament revived and strengthened the 
severe laws against it.  And this so angered ROBERT CATESBY, a 
restless Catholic gentleman of an old family, that he formed one of 
the most desperate and terrible designs ever conceived in the mind 
of man; no less a scheme than the Gunpowder Plot.

His object was, when the King, lords, and commons, should be 
assembled at the next opening of Parliament, to blow them up, one 
and all, with a great mine of gunpowder.  The first person to whom 
he confided this horrible idea was THOMAS WINTER, a Worcestershire 
gentleman who had served in the army abroad, and had been secretly 
employed in Catholic projects.  While Winter was yet undecided, and 
when he had gone over to the Netherlands, to learn from the Spanish 
Ambassador there whether there was any hope of Catholics being 
relieved through the intercession of the King of Spain with his 
Sowship, he found at Ostend a tall, dark, daring man, whom he had 
known when they were both soldiers abroad, and whose name was GUIDO 
- or GUY - FAWKES.  Resolved to join the plot, he proposed it to 
this man, knowing him to be the man for any desperate deed, and 
they two came back to England together.  Here, they admitted two 
other conspirators; THOMAS PERCY, related to the Earl of 
Northumberland, and JOHN WRIGHT, his brother-in-law.  All these met 
together in a solitary house in the open fields which were then 
near Clement's Inn, now a closely blocked-up part of London; and 
when they had all taken a great oath of secrecy, Catesby told the 
rest what his plan was.  They then went up-stairs into a garret, 
and received the Sacrament from FATHER GERARD, a Jesuit, who is 
said not to have known actually of the Gunpowder Plot, but who, I 
think, must have had his suspicions that there was something 
desperate afoot.

Percy was a Gentleman Pensioner, and as he had occasional duties to 
perform about the Court, then kept at Whitehall, there would be 
nothing suspicious in his living at Westminster.  So, having looked 
well about him, and having found a house to let, the back of which 
joined the Parliament House, he hired it of a person named FERRIS, 
for the purpose of undermining the wall.  Having got possession of 
this house, the conspirators hired another on the Lambeth side of 
the Thames, which they used as a storehouse for wood, gunpowder, 
and other combustible matters.  These were to be removed at night 
(and afterwards were removed), bit by bit, to the house at 
Westminster; and, that there might be some trusty person to keep 
watch over the Lambeth stores, they admitted another conspirator, 
by name ROBERT KAY, a very poor Catholic gentleman.

All these arrangements had been made some months, and it was a 
dark, wintry, December night, when the conspirators, who had been 
in the meantime dispersed to avoid observation, met in the house at 
Westminster, and began to dig.  They had laid in a good stock of 
eatables, to avoid going in and out, and they dug and dug with 
great ardour.  But, the wall being tremendously thick, and the work 
very severe, they took into their plot CHRISTOPHER WRIGHT, a 
younger brother of John Wright, that they might have a new pair of 
hands to help.  And Christopher Wright fell to like a fresh man, 
and they dug and dug by night and by day, and Fawkes stood sentinel 
all the time.  And if any man's heart seemed to fail him at all, 
Fawkes said, 'Gentlemen, we have abundance of powder and shot here, 
and there is no fear of our being taken alive, even if discovered.'  
The same Fawkes, who, in the capacity of sentinel, was always 
prowling about, soon picked up the intelligence that the King had 
prorogued the Parliament again, from the seventh of February, the 
day first fixed upon, until the third of October.  When the 
conspirators knew this, they agreed to separate until after the 
Christmas holidays, and to take no notice of each other in the 
meanwhile, and never to write letters to one another on any 
account.  So, the house in Westminster was shut up again, and I 
suppose the neighbours thought that those strange-looking men who 
lived there so gloomily, and went out so seldom, were gone away to 
have a merry Christmas somewhere.

It was the beginning of February, sixteen hundred and five, when 
Catesby met his fellow-conspirators again at this Westminster 
house.  He had now admitted three more; JOHN GRANT, a Warwickshire 
gentleman of a melancholy temper, who lived in a doleful house near 
Stratford-upon-Avon, with a frowning wall all round it, and a deep 
moat; ROBERT WINTER, eldest brother of Thomas; and Catesby's own 
servant, THOMAS BATES, who, Catesby thought, had had some suspicion 
of what his master was about.  These three had all suffered more or 
less for their religion in Elizabeth's time.  And now, they all 
began to dig again, and they dug and dug by night and by day.

They found it dismal work alone there, underground, with such a 
fearful secret on their minds, and so many murders before them.  
They were filled with wild fancies.  Sometimes, they thought they 
heard a great bell tolling, deep down in the earth under the 
Parliament House; sometimes, they thought they heard low voices 
muttering about the Gunpowder Plot; once in the morning, they 
really did hear a great rumbling noise over their heads, as they 
dug and sweated in their mine.  Every man stopped and looked aghast 
at his neighbour, wondering what had happened, when that bold 
prowler, Fawkes, who had been out to look, came in and told them 
that it was only a dealer in coals who had occupied a cellar under 
the Parliament House, removing his stock in trade to some other 
place.  Upon this, the conspirators, who with all their digging and 
digging had not yet dug through the tremendously thick wall, 
changed their plan; hired that cellar, which was directly under the 
House of Lords; put six-and-thirty barrels of gunpowder in it, and 
covered them over with fagots and coals.  Then they all dispersed 
again till September, when the following new conspirators were 
admitted; SIR EDWARD BAYNHAM, of Gloucestershire; SIR EVERARD 
DIGBY, of Rutlandshire; AMBROSE ROOKWOOD, of Suffolk; FRANCIS 
TRESHAM, of Northamptonshire.  Most of these were rich, and were to 
assist the plot, some with money and some with horses on which the 
conspirators were to ride through the country and rouse the 
Catholics after the Parliament should be blown into air.

Parliament being again prorogued from the third of October to the 
fifth of November, and the conspirators being uneasy lest their 
design should have been found out, Thomas Winter said he would go 
up into the House of Lords on the day of the prorogation, and see 
how matters looked.  Nothing could be better.  The unconscious 
Commissioners were walking about and talking to one another, just 
over the six-and-thirty barrels of gunpowder.  He came back and 
told the rest so, and they went on with their preparations.  They 
hired a ship, and kept it ready in the Thames, in which Fawkes was 
to sail for Flanders after firing with a slow match the train that 
was to explode the powder.  A number of Catholic gentlemen not in 
the secret, were invited, on pretence of a hunting party, to meet 
Sir Everard Digby at Dunchurch on the fatal day, that they might be 
ready to act together.  And now all was ready.

But, now, the great wickedness and danger which had been all along 
at the bottom of this wicked plot, began to show itself.  As the 
fifth of November drew near, most of the conspirators, remembering 
that they had friends and relations who would be in the House of 
Lords that day, felt some natural relenting, and a wish to warn 
them to keep away.  They were not much comforted by Catesby's 
declaring that in such a cause he would blow up his own son.  LORD 
MOUNTEAGLE, Tresham's brother-in-law, was certain to be in the 
house; and when Tresham found that he could not prevail upon the 
rest to devise any means of sparing their friends, he wrote a 
mysterious letter to this lord and left it at his lodging in the 
dusk, urging him to keep away from the opening of Parliament, 
'since God and man had concurred to punish the wickedness of the 
times.'  It contained the words 'that the Parliament should receive 
a terrible blow, and yet should not see who hurt them.'  And it 
added, 'the danger is past, as soon as you have burnt the letter.'

The ministers and courtiers made out that his Sowship, by a direct 
miracle from Heaven, found out what this letter meant.  The truth 
is, that they were not long (as few men would be) in finding out 
for themselves; and it was decided to let the conspirators alone, 
until the very day before the opening of Parliament.  That the 
conspirators had their fears, is certain; for, Tresham himself said 
before them all, that they were every one dead men; and, although 
even he did not take flight, there is reason to suppose that he had 
warned other persons besides Lord Mounteagle.  However, they were 
all firm; and Fawkes, who was a man of iron, went down every day 
and night to keep watch in the cellar as usual.  He was there about 
two in the afternoon of the fourth, when the Lord Chamberlain and 
Lord Mounteagle threw open the door and looked in.  'Who are you, 
friend?' said they.  'Why,' said Fawkes, 'I am Mr. Percy's servant, 
and am looking after his store of fuel here.'  'Your master has 
laid in a pretty good store,' they returned, and shut the door, and 
went away.  Fawkes, upon this, posted off to the other conspirators 
to tell them all was quiet, and went back and shut himself up in 
the dark, black cellar again, where he heard the bell go twelve 
o'clock and usher in the fifth of November.  About two hours 
afterwards, he slowly opened the door, and came out to look about 
him, in his old prowling way.  He was instantly seized and bound, 
by a party of soldiers under SIR THOMAS KNEVETT.  He had a watch 
upon him, some touchwood, some tinder, some slow matches; and there 
was a dark lantern with a candle in it, lighted, behind the door.  
He had his boots and spurs on - to ride to the ship, I suppose - 
and it was well for the soldiers that they took him so suddenly.  
If they had left him but a moment's time to light a match, he 
certainly would have tossed it in among the powder, and blown up 
himself and them.

They took him to the King's bed-chamber first of all, and there the 
King (causing him to be held very tight, and keeping a good way 
off), asked him how he could have the heart to intend to destroy so 
many innocent people?  'Because,' said Guy Fawkes, 'desperate 
diseases need desperate remedies.'  To a little Scotch favourite, 
with a face like a terrier, who asked him (with no particular 
wisdom) why he had collected so much gunpowder, he replied, because 
he had meant to blow Scotchmen back to Scotland, and it would take 
a deal of powder to do that.  Next day he was carried to the Tower, 
but would make no confession.  Even after being horribly tortured, 
he confessed nothing that the Government did not already know; 
though he must have been in a fearful state - as his signature, 
still preserved, in contrast with his natural hand-writing before 
he was put upon the dreadful rack, most frightfully shows.  Bates, 
a very different man, soon said the Jesuits had had to do with the 
plot, and probably, under the torture, would as readily have said 
anything.  Tresham, taken and put in the Tower too, made 
confessions and unmade them, and died of an illness that was heavy 
upon him.  Rookwood, who had stationed relays of his own horses all 
the way to Dunchurch, did not mount to escape until the middle of 
the day, when the news of the plot was all over London.  On the 
road, he came up with the two Wrights, Catesby, and Percy; and they 
all galloped together into Northamptonshire.  Thence to Dunchurch, 
where they found the proposed party assembled.  Finding, however, 
that there had been a plot, and that it had been discovered, the 
party disappeared in the course of the night, and left them alone 
with Sir Everard Digby.  Away they all rode again, through 
Warwickshire and Worcestershire, to a house called Holbeach, on the 
borders of Staffordshire.  They tried to raise the Catholics on 
their way, but were indignantly driven off by them.  All this time 
they were hotly pursued by the sheriff of Worcester, and a fast 
increasing concourse of riders.  At last, resolving to defend 
themselves at Holbeach, they shut themselves up in the house, and 
put some wet powder before the fire to dry.  But it blew up, and 
Catesby was singed and blackened, and almost killed, and some of 
the others were sadly hurt.  Still, knowing that they must die, 
they resolved to die there, and with only their swords in their 
hands appeared at the windows to be shot at by the sheriff and his 
assistants.  Catesby said to Thomas Winter, after Thomas had been 
hit in the right arm which dropped powerless by his side, 'Stand by 
me, Tom, and we will die together!' - which they did, being shot 
through the body by two bullets from one gun.  John Wright, and 
Christopher Wright, and Percy, were also shot.  Rookwood and Digby 
were taken:  the former with a broken arm and a wound in his body 
too.

It was the fifteenth of January, before the trial of Guy Fawkes, 
and such of the other conspirators as were left alive, came on.  
They were all found guilty, all hanged, drawn, and quartered:  
some, in St. Paul's Churchyard, on the top of Ludgate-hill; some, 
before the Parliament House.  A Jesuit priest, named HENRY GARNET, 
to whom the dreadful design was said to have been communicated, was 
taken and tried; and two of his servants, as well as a poor priest 
who was taken with him, were tortured without mercy.  He himself 
was not tortured, but was surrounded in the Tower by tamperers and 
traitors, and so was made unfairly to convict himself out of his 
own mouth.  He said, upon his trial, that he had done all he could 
to prevent the deed, and that he could not make public what had 
been told him in confession - though I am afraid he knew of the 
plot in other ways.  He was found guilty and executed, after a 
manful defence, and the Catholic Church made a saint of him; some 
rich and powerful persons, who had had nothing to do with the 
project, were fined and imprisoned for it by the Star Chamber; the 
Catholics, in general, who had recoiled with horror from the idea 
of the infernal contrivance, were unjustly put under more severe 
laws than before; and this was the end of the Gunpowder Plot.


SECOND PART


His Sowship would pretty willingly, I think, have blown the House 
of Commons into the air himself; for, his dread and jealousy of it 
knew no bounds all through his reign.  When he was hard pressed for 
money he was obliged to order it to meet, as he could get no money 
without it; and when it asked him first to abolish some of the 
monopolies in necessaries of life which were a great grievance to 
the people, and to redress other public wrongs, he flew into a rage 
and got rid of it again.  At one time he wanted it to consent to 
the Union of England with Scotland, and quarrelled about that.  At 
another time it wanted him to put down a most infamous Church 
abuse, called the High Commission Court, and he quarrelled with it 
about that.  At another time it entreated him not to be quite so 
fond of his archbishops and bishops who made speeches in his praise 
too awful to be related, but to have some little consideration for 
the poor Puritan clergy who were persecuted for preaching in their 
own way, and not according to the archbishops and bishops; and they 
quarrelled about that.  In short, what with hating the House of 
Commons, and pretending not to hate it; and what with now sending 
some of its members who opposed him, to Newgate or to the Tower, 
and now telling the rest that they must not presume to make 
speeches about the public affairs which could not possibly concern 
them; and what with cajoling, and bullying, and fighting, and being 
frightened; the House of Commons was the plague of his Sowship's 
existence.  It was pretty firm, however, in maintaining its rights, 
and insisting that the Parliament should make the laws, and not the 
King by his own single proclamations (which he tried hard to do); 
and his Sowship was so often distressed for money, in consequence, 
that he sold every sort of title and public office as if they were 
merchandise, and even invented a new dignity called a Baronetcy, 
which anybody could buy for a thousand pounds.

These disputes with his Parliaments, and his hunting, and his 
drinking, and his lying in bed - for he was a great sluggard - 
occupied his Sowship pretty well.  The rest of his time he chiefly 
passed in hugging and slobbering his favourites.  The first of 
these was SIR PHILIP HERBERT, who had no knowledge whatever, except 
of dogs, and horses, and hunting, but whom he soon made EARL OF 
MONTGOMERY.  The next, and a much more famous one, was ROBERT CARR, 
or KER (for it is not certain which was his right name), who came 
from the Border country, and whom he soon made VISCOUNT ROCHESTER, 
and afterwards, EARL OF SOMERSET.  The way in which his Sowship 
doted on this handsome young man, is even more odious to think of, 
than the way in which the really great men of England condescended 
to bow down before him.  The favourite's great friend was a certain 
SIR THOMAS OVERBURY, who wrote his love-letters for him, and 
assisted him in the duties of his many high places, which his own 
ignorance prevented him from discharging.  But this same Sir Thomas 
having just manhood enough to dissuade the favourite from a wicked 
marriage with the beautiful Countess of Essex, who was to get a 
divorce from her husband for the purpose, the said Countess, in her 
rage, got Sir Thomas put into the Tower, and there poisoned him.  
Then the favourite and this bad woman were publicly married by the 
King's pet bishop, with as much to-do and rejoicing, as if he had 
been the best man, and she the best woman, upon the face of the 
earth.

But, after a longer sunshine than might have been expected - of 
seven years or so, that is to say - another handsome young man 
started up and eclipsed the EARL OF SOMERSET.  This was GEORGE 
VILLIERS, the youngest son of a Leicestershire gentleman:  who came 
to Court with all the Paris fashions on him, and could dance as 
well as the best mountebank that ever was seen.  He soon danced 
himself into the good graces of his Sowship, and danced the other 
favourite out of favour.  Then, it was all at once discovered that 
the Earl and Countess of Somerset had not deserved all those great 
promotions and mighty rejoicings, and they were separately tried 
for the murder of Sir Thomas Overbury, and for other crimes.  But, 
the King was so afraid of his late favourite's publicly telling 
some disgraceful things he knew of him - which he darkly threatened 
to do - that he was even examined with two men standing, one on 
either side of him, each with a cloak in his hand, ready to throw 
it over his head and stop his mouth if he should break out with 
what he had it in his power to tell.  So, a very lame affair was 
purposely made of the trial, and his punishment was an allowance of 
four thousand pounds a year in retirement, while the Countess was 
pardoned, and allowed to pass into retirement too.  They hated one 
another by this time, and lived to revile and torment each other 
some years.

While these events were in progress, and while his Sowship was 
making such an exhibition of himself, from day to day and from year 
to year, as is not often seen in any sty, three remarkable deaths 
took place in England.  The first was that of the Minister, Robert 
Cecil, Earl of Salisbury, who was past sixty, and had never been 
strong, being deformed from his birth.  He said at last that he had 
no wish to live; and no Minister need have had, with his experience 
of the meanness and wickedness of those disgraceful times.  The 
second was that of the Lady Arabella Stuart, who alarmed his 
Sowship mightily, by privately marrying WILLIAM SEYMOUR, son of 
LORD BEAUCHAMP, who was a descendant of King Henry the Seventh, and 
who, his Sowship thought, might consequently increase and 
strengthen any claim she might one day set up to the throne.  She 
was separated from her husband (who was put in the Tower) and 
thrust into a boat to be confined at Durham.  She escaped in a 
man's dress to get away in a French ship from Gravesend to France, 
but unhappily missed her husband, who had escaped too, and was soon 
taken.  She went raving mad in the miserable Tower, and died there 
after four years.  The last, and the most important of these three 
deaths, was that of Prince Henry, the heir to the throne, in the 
nineteenth year of his age.  He was a promising young prince, and 
greatly liked; a quiet, well-conducted youth, of whom two very good 
things are known:  first, that his father was jealous of him; 
secondly, that he was the friend of Sir Walter Raleigh, languishing 
through all those years in the Tower, and often said that no man 
but his father would keep such a bird in such a cage.  On the 
occasion of the preparations for the marriage of his sister the 
Princess Elizabeth with a foreign prince (and an unhappy marriage 
it turned out), he came from Richmond, where he had been very ill, 
to greet his new brother-in-law, at the palace at Whitehall.  There 
he played a great game at tennis, in his shirt, though it was very 
cold weather, and was seized with an alarming illness, and died 
within a fortnight of a putrid fever.  For this young prince Sir 
Walter Raleigh wrote, in his prison in the Tower, the beginning of 
a History of the World:  a wonderful instance how little his 
Sowship could do to confine a great man's mind, however long he 
might imprison his body.

And this mention of Sir Walter Raleigh, who had many faults, but 
who never showed so many merits as in trouble and adversity, may 
bring me at once to the end of his sad story.  After an 
imprisonment in the Tower of twelve long years, he proposed to 
resume those old sea voyages of his, and to go to South America in 
search of gold.  His Sowship, divided between his wish to be on 
good terms with the Spaniards through whose territory Sir Walter 
must pass (he had long had an idea of marrying Prince Henry to a 
Spanish Princess), and his avaricious eagerness to get hold of the 
gold, did not know what to do.  But, in the end, he set Sir Walter 
free, taking securities for his return; and Sir Walter fitted out 
an expedition at his own coast and, on the twenty-eighth of March, 
one thousand six hundred and seventeen, sailed away in command of 
one of its ships, which he ominously called the Destiny.  The 
expedition failed; the common men, not finding the gold they had 
expected, mutinied; a quarrel broke out between Sir Walter and the 
Spaniards, who hated him for old successes of his against them; and 
he took and burnt a little town called SAINT THOMAS.  For this he 
was denounced to his Sowship by the Spanish Ambassador as a pirate; 
and returning almost broken-hearted, with his hopes and fortunes 
shattered, his company of friends dispersed, and his brave son (who 
had been one of them) killed, he was taken - through the treachery 
of SIR LEWIS STUKELY, his near relation, a scoundrel and a Vice-
Admiral - and was once again immured in his prison-home of so many 
years.

His Sowship being mightily disappointed in not getting any gold, 
Sir Walter Raleigh was tried as unfairly, and with as many lies and 
evasions as the judges and law officers and every other authority 
in Church and State habitually practised under such a King.  After 
a great deal of prevarication on all parts but his own, it was 
declared that he must die under his former sentence, now fifteen 
years old.  So, on the twenty-eighth of October, one thousand six 
hundred and eighteen, he was shut up in the Gate House at 
Westminster to pass his late night on earth, and there he took 
leave of his good and faithful lady who was worthy to have lived in 
better days.  At eight o'clock next morning, after a cheerful 
breakfast, and a pipe, and a cup of good wine, he was taken to Old 
Palace Yard in Westminster, where the scaffold was set up, and 
where so many people of high degree were assembled to see him die, 
that it was a matter of some difficulty to get him through the 
crowd.  He behaved most nobly, but if anything lay heavy on his 
mind, it was that Earl of Essex, whose head he had seen roll off; 
and he solemnly said that he had had no hand in bringing him to the 
block, and that he had shed tears for him when he died.  As the 
morning was very cold, the Sheriff said, would he come down to a 
fire for a little space, and warm himself?  But Sir Walter thanked 
him, and said no, he would rather it were done at once, for he was 
ill of fever and ague, and in another quarter of an hour his 
shaking fit would come upon him if he were still alive, and his 
enemies might then suppose that he trembled for fear.  With that, 
he kneeled and made a very beautiful and Christian prayer.  Before 
he laid his head upon the block he felt the edge of the axe, and 
said, with a smile upon his face, that it was a sharp medicine, but 
would cure the worst disease.  When he was bent down ready for 
death, he said to the executioner, finding that he hesitated, 'What 
dost thou fear?  Strike, man!'  So, the axe came down and struck 
his head off, in the sixty-sixth year of his age.

The new favourite got on fast.  He was made a viscount, he was made 
Duke of Buckingham, he was made a marquis, he was made Master of 
the Horse, he was made Lord High Admiral - and the Chief Commander 
of the gallant English forces that had dispersed the Spanish 
Armada, was displaced to make room for him.  He had the whole 
kingdom at his disposal, and his mother sold all the profits and 
honours of the State, as if she had kept a shop.  He blazed all 
over with diamonds and other precious stones, from his hatband and 
his earrings to his shoes.  Yet he was an ignorant presumptuous, 
swaggering compound of knave and fool, with nothing but his beauty 
and his dancing to recommend him.  This is the gentleman who called 
himself his Majesty's dog and slave, and called his Majesty Your 
Sowship.  His Sowship called him STEENIE; it is supposed, because 
that was a nickname for Stephen, and because St. Stephen was 
generally represented in pictures as a handsome saint.

His Sowship was driven sometimes to his wits'-end by his trimming 
between the general dislike of the Catholic religion at home, and 
his desire to wheedle and flatter it abroad, as his only means of 
getting a rich princess for his son's wife:  a part of whose 
fortune he might cram into his greasy pockets.  Prince Charles - or 
as his Sowship called him, Baby Charles - being now PRINCE OF 
WALES, the old project of a marriage with the Spanish King's 
daughter had been revived for him; and as she could not marry a 
Protestant without leave from the Pope, his Sowship himself 
secretly and meanly wrote to his Infallibility, asking for it.  The 
negotiation for this Spanish marriage takes up a larger space in 
great books, than you can imagine, but the upshot of it all is, 
that when it had been held off by the Spanish Court for a long 
time, Baby Charles and Steenie set off in disguise as Mr. Thomas 
Smith and Mr. John Smith, to see the Spanish Princess; that Baby 
Charles pretended to be desperately in love with her, and jumped 
off walls to look at her, and made a considerable fool of himself 
in a good many ways; that she was called Princess of Wales and that 
the whole Spanish Court believed Baby Charles to be all but dying 
for her sake, as he expressly told them he was; that Baby Charles 
and Steenie came back to England, and were received with as much 
rapture as if they had been a blessing to it; that Baby Charles had 
actually fallen in love with HENRIETTA MARIA, the French King's 
sister, whom he had seen in Paris; that he thought it a wonderfully 
fine and princely thing to have deceived the Spaniards, all 
through; and that he openly said, with a chuckle, as soon as he was 
safe and sound at home again, that the Spaniards were great fools 
to have believed him.

Like most dishonest men, the Prince and the favourite complained 
that the people whom they had deluded were dishonest.  They made 
such misrepresentations of the treachery of the Spaniards in this 
business of the Spanish match, that the English nation became eager 
for a war with them.  Although the gravest Spaniards laughed at the 
idea of his Sowship in a warlike attitude, the Parliament granted 
money for the beginning of hostilities, and the treaties with Spain 
were publicly declared to be at an end.  The Spanish ambassador in 
London - probably with the help of the fallen favourite, the Earl 
of Somerset - being unable to obtain speech with his Sowship, 
slipped a paper into his hand, declaring that he was a prisoner in 
his own house, and was entirely governed by Buckingham and his 
creatures.  The first effect of this letter was that his Sowship 
began to cry and whine, and took Baby Charles away from Steenie, 
and went down to Windsor, gabbling all sorts of nonsense.  The end 
of it was that his Sowship hugged his dog and slave, and said he 
was quite satisfied.

He had given the Prince and the favourite almost unlimited power to 
settle anything with the Pope as to the Spanish marriage; and he 
now, with a view to the French one, signed a treaty that all Roman 
Catholics in England should exercise their religion freely, and 
should never be required to take any oath contrary thereto.  In 
return for this, and for other concessions much less to be 
defended, Henrietta Maria was to become the Prince's wife, and was 
to bring him a fortune of eight hundred thousand crowns.

His Sowship's eyes were getting red with eagerly looking for the 
money, when the end of a gluttonous life came upon him; and, after 
a fortnight's illness, on Sunday the twenty-seventh of March, one 
thousand six hundred and twenty-five, he died.  He had reigned 
twenty-two years, and was fifty-nine years old.  I know of nothing 
more abominable in history than the adulation that was lavished on 
this King, and the vice and corruption that such a barefaced habit 
of lying produced in his court.  It is much to be doubted whether 
one man of honour, and not utterly self-disgraced, kept his place 
near James the First.  Lord Bacon, that able and wise philosopher, 
as the First Judge in the Kingdom in this reign, became a public 
spectacle of dishonesty and corruption; and in his base flattery of 
his Sowship, and in his crawling servility to his dog and slave, 
disgraced himself even more.  But, a creature like his Sowship set 
upon a throne is like the Plague, and everybody receives infection 
from him.



CHAPTER XXXIII - ENGLAND UNDER CHARLES THE FIRST



BABY CHARLES became KING CHARLES THE FIRST, in the twenty-fifth 
year of his age.  Unlike his father, he was usually amiable in his 
private character, and grave and dignified in his bearing; but, 
like his father, he had monstrously exaggerated notions of the 
rights of a king, and was evasive, and not to be trusted.  If his 
word could have been relied upon, his history might have had a 
different end.

His first care was to send over that insolent upstart, Buckingham, 
to bring Henrietta Maria from Paris to be his Queen; upon which 
occasion Buckingham - with his usual audacity - made love to the 
young Queen of Austria, and was very indignant indeed with CARDINAL 
RICHELIEU, the French Minister, for thwarting his intentions.  The 
English people were very well disposed to like their new Queen, and 
to receive her with great favour when she came among them as a 
stranger.  But, she held the Protestant religion in great dislike, 
and brought over a crowd of unpleasant priests, who made her do 
some very ridiculous things, and forced themselves upon the public 
notice in many disagreeable ways.  Hence, the people soon came to 
dislike her, and she soon came to dislike them; and she did so much 
all through this reign in setting the King (who was dotingly fond 
of her) against his subjects, that it would have been better for 
him if she had never been born.

Now, you are to understand that King Charles the First - of his own 
determination to be a high and mighty King not to be called to 
account by anybody, and urged on by his Queen besides - 
deliberately set himself to put his Parliament down and to put 
himself up. You are also to understand, that even in pursuit of 
this wrong idea (enough in itself to have ruined any king) he never 
took a straight course, but always took a crooked one.

He was bent upon war with Spain, though neither the House of 
Commons nor the people were quite clear as to the justice of that 
war, now that they began to think a little more about the story of 
the Spanish match.  But the King rushed into it hotly, raised money 
by illegal means to meet its expenses, and encountered a miserable 
failure at Cadiz, in the very first year of his reign.  An 
expedition to Cadiz had been made in the hope of plunder, but as it 
was not successful, it was necessary to get a grant of money from 
the Parliament; and when they met, in no very complying humour, 
the, King told them, 'to make haste to let him have it, or it would 
be the worse for themselves.'  Not put in a more complying humour 
by this, they impeached the King's favourite, the Duke of 
Buckingham, as the cause (which he undoubtedly was) of many great 
public grievances and wrongs.  The King, to save him, dissolved the 
Parliament without getting the money he wanted; and when the Lords 
implored him to consider and grant a little delay, he replied, 'No, 
not one minute.'  He then began to raise money for himself by the 
following means among others.

He levied certain duties called tonnage and poundage which had not 
been granted by the Parliament, and could lawfully be levied by no 
other power; he called upon the seaport towns to furnish, and to 
pay all the cost for three months of, a fleet of armed ships; and 
he required the people to unite in lending him large sums of money, 
the repayment of which was very doubtful.  If the poor people 
refused, they were pressed as soldiers or sailors; if the gentry 
refused, they were sent to prison.  Five gentlemen, named SIR 
THOMAS DARNEL, JOHN CORBET, WALTER EARL, JOHN HEVENINGHAM, and 
EVERARD HAMPDEN, for refusing were taken up by a warrant of the 
King's privy council, and were sent to prison without any cause but 
the King's pleasure being stated for their imprisonment.  Then the 
question came to be solemnly tried, whether this was not a 
violation of Magna Charta, and an encroachment by the King on the 
highest rights of the English people.  His lawyers contended No, 
because to encroach upon the rights of the English people would be 
to do wrong, and the King could do no wrong.  The accommodating 
judges decided in favour of this wicked nonsense; and here was a 
fatal division between the King and the people.

For all this, it became necessary to call another Parliament.  The 
people, sensible of the danger in which their liberties were, chose 
for it those who were best known for their determined opposition to 
the King; but still the King, quite blinded by his determination to 
carry everything before him, addressed them when they met, in a 
contemptuous manner, and just told them in so many words that he 
had only called them together because he wanted money.  The 
Parliament, strong enough and resolute enough to know that they 
would lower his tone, cared little for what he said, and laid 
before him one of the great documents of history, which is called 
the PETITION OF RIGHT, requiring that the free men of England 
should no longer be called upon to lend the King money, and should 
no longer be pressed or imprisoned for refusing to do so; further, 
that the free men of England should no longer be seized by the 
King's special mandate or warrant, it being contrary to their 
rights and liberties and the laws of their country.  At first the 
King returned an answer to this petition, in which he tried to 
shirk it altogether; but, the House of Commons then showing their 
determination to go on with the impeachment of Buckingham, the King 
in alarm returned an answer, giving his consent to all that was 
required of him.  He not only afterwards departed from his word and 
honour on these points, over and over again, but, at this very 
time, he did the mean and dissembling act of publishing his first 
answer and not his second - merely that the people might suppose 
that the Parliament had not got the better of him.

That pestilent Buckingham, to gratify his own wounded vanity, had 
by this time involved the country in war with France, as well as 
with Spain.  For such miserable causes and such miserable creatures 
are wars sometimes made!  But he was destined to do little more 
mischief in this world.  One morning, as he was going out of his 
house to his carriage, he turned to speak to a certain Colonel 
FRYER who was with him; and he was violently stabbed with a knife, 
which the murderer left sticking in his heart.  This happened in 
his hall.  He had had angry words up-stairs, just before, with some 
French gentlemen, who were immediately suspected by his servants, 
and had a close escape from being set upon and killed.  In the 
midst of the noise, the real murderer, who had gone to the kitchen 
and might easily have got away, drew his sword and cried out, 'I am 
the man!'  His name was JOHN FELTON, a Protestant and a retired 
officer in the army.  He said he had had no personal ill-will to 
the Duke, but had killed him as a curse to the country.  He had 
aimed his blow well, for Buckingham had only had time to cry out, 
'Villain!' and then he drew out the knife, fell against a table, 
and died.

The council made a mighty business of examining John Felton about 
this murder, though it was a plain case enough, one would think.  
He had come seventy miles to do it, he told them, and he did it for 
the reason he had declared; if they put him upon the rack, as that 
noble MARQUIS OF DORSET whom he saw before him, had the goodness to 
threaten, he gave that marquis warning, that he would accuse HIM as 
his accomplice!  The King was unpleasantly anxious to have him 
racked, nevertheless; but as the judges now found out that torture 
was contrary to the law of England - it is a pity they did not make 
the discovery a little sooner - John Felton was simply executed for 
the murder he had done.  A murder it undoubtedly was, and not in 
the least to be defended:  though he had freed England from one of 
the most profligate, contemptible, and base court favourites to 
whom it has ever yielded.

A very different man now arose.  This was SIR THOMAS WENTWORTH, a 
Yorkshire gentleman, who had sat in Parliament for a long time, and 
who had favoured arbitrary and haughty principles, but who had gone 
over to the people's side on receiving offence from Buckingham.  
The King, much wanting such a man - for, besides being naturally 
favourable to the King's cause, he had great abilities - made him 
first a Baron, and then a Viscount, and gave him high employment, 
and won him most completely.

A Parliament, however, was still in existence, and was NOT to be 
won.  On the twentieth of January, one thousand six hundred and 
twenty-nine, SIR JOHN ELIOT, a great man who had been active in the 
Petition of Right, brought forward other strong resolutions against 
the King's chief instruments, and called upon the Speaker to put 
them to the vote.  To this the Speaker answered, 'he was commanded 
otherwise by the King,' and got up to leave the chair - which, 
according to the rules of the House of Commons would have obliged 
it to adjourn without doing anything more - when two members, named 
Mr. HOLLIS and Mr. VALENTINE, held him down.  A scene of great 
confusion arose among the members; and while many swords were drawn 
and flashing about, the King, who was kept informed of all that was 
going on, told the captain of his guard to go down to the House and 
force the doors.  The resolutions were by that time, however, 
voted, and the House adjourned.  Sir John Eliot and those two 
members who had held the Speaker down, were quickly summoned before 
the council.  As they claimed it to be their privilege not to 
answer out of Parliament for anything they had said in it, they 
were committed to the Tower.  The King then went down and dissolved 
the Parliament, in a speech wherein he made mention of these 
gentlemen as 'Vipers' - which did not do him much good that ever I 
have heard of.

As they refused to gain their liberty by saying they were sorry for 
what they had done, the King, always remarkably unforgiving, never 
overlooked their offence.  When they demanded to be brought up 
before the court of King's Bench, he even resorted to the meanness 
of having them moved about from prison to prison, so that the writs 
issued for that purpose should not legally find them.  At last they 
came before the court and were sentenced to heavy fines, and to be 
imprisoned during the King's pleasure.  When Sir John Eliot's 
health had quite given way, and he so longed for change of air and 
scene as to petition for his release, the King sent back the answer 
(worthy of his Sowship himself) that the petition was not humble 
enough.  When he sent another petition by his young son, in which 
he pathetically offered to go back to prison when his health was 
restored, if he might be released for its recovery, the King still 
disregarded it.  When he died in the Tower, and his children 
petitioned to be allowed to take his body down to Cornwall, there 
to lay it among the ashes of his forefathers, the King returned for 
answer, 'Let Sir John Eliot's body be buried in the church of that 
parish where he died.'  All this was like a very little King 
indeed, I think.

And now, for twelve long years, steadily pursuing his design of 
setting himself up and putting the people down, the King called no 
Parliament; but ruled without one.  If twelve thousand volumes were 
written in his praise (as a good many have been) it would still 
remain a fact, impossible to be denied, that for twelve years King 
Charles the First reigned in England unlawfully and despotically, 
seized upon his subjects' goods and money at his pleasure, and 
punished according to his unbridled will all who ventured to oppose 
him.  It is a fashion with some people to think that this King's 
career was cut short; but I must say myself that I think he ran a 
pretty long one.

WILLIAM LAUD, Archbishop of Canterbury, was the King's right-hand 
man in the religious part of the putting down of the people's 
liberties.  Laud, who was a sincere man, of large learning but 
small sense - for the two things sometimes go together in very 
different quantities - though a Protestant, held opinions so near 
those of the Catholics, that the Pope wanted to make a Cardinal of 
him, if he would have accepted that favour.  He looked upon vows, 
robes, lighted candles, images, and so forth, as amazingly 
important in religious ceremonies; and he brought in an immensity 
of bowing and candle-snuffing.  He also regarded archbishops and 
bishops as a sort of miraculous persons, and was inveterate in the 
last degree against any who thought otherwise.  Accordingly, he 
offered up thanks to Heaven, and was in a state of much pious 
pleasure, when a Scotch clergyman, named LEIGHTON, was pilloried, 
whipped, branded in the cheek, and had one of his ears cut off and 
one of his nostrils slit, for calling bishops trumpery and the 
inventions of men.  He originated on a Sunday morning the 
prosecution of WILLIAM PRYNNE, a barrister who was of similar 
opinions, and who was fined a thousand pounds; who was pilloried; 
who had his ears cut off on two occasions - one ear at a time - and 
who was imprisoned for life.  He highly approved of the punishment 
of DOCTOR BASTWICK, a physician; who was also fined a thousand 
pounds; and who afterwards had HIS ears cut off, and was imprisoned 
for life.  These were gentle methods of persuasion, some will tell 
you:  I think, they were rather calculated to be alarming to the 
people.

In the money part of the putting down of the people's liberties, 
the King was equally gentle, as some will tell you:  as I think, 
equally alarming.  He levied those duties of tonnage and poundage, 
and increased them as he thought fit.  He granted monopolies to 
companies of merchants on their paying him for them, 
notwithstanding the great complaints that had, for years and years, 
been made on the subject of monopolies.  He fined the people for 
disobeying proclamations issued by his Sowship in direct violation 
of law.  He revived the detested Forest laws, and took private 
property to himself as his forest right.  Above all, he determined 
to have what was called Ship Money; that is to say, money for the 
support of the fleet - not only from the seaports, but from all the 
counties of England:  having found out that, in some ancient time 
or other, all the counties paid it.  The grievance of this ship 
money being somewhat too strong, JOHN CHAMBERS, a citizen of 
London, refused to pay his part of it.  For this the Lord Mayor 
ordered John Chambers to prison, and for that John Chambers brought 
a suit against the Lord Mayor.  LORD SAY, also, behaved like a real 
nobleman, and declared he would not pay.  But, the sturdiest and 
best opponent of the ship money was JOHN HAMPDEN, a gentleman of 
Buckinghamshire, who had sat among the 'vipers' in the House of 
Commons when there was such a thing, and who had been the bosom 
friend of Sir John Eliot.  This case was tried before the twelve 
judges in the Court of Exchequer, and again the King's lawyers said 
it was impossible that ship money could be wrong, because the King 
could do no wrong, however hard he tried - and he really did try 
very hard during these twelve years.  Seven of the judges said that 
was quite true, and Mr. Hampden was bound to pay:  five of the 
judges said that was quite false, and Mr. Hampden was not bound to 
pay.  So, the King triumphed (as he thought), by making Hampden the 
most popular man in England; where matters were getting to that 
height now, that many honest Englishmen could not endure their 
country, and sailed away across the seas to found a colony in 
Massachusetts Bay in America.  It is said that Hampden himself and 
his relation OLIVER CROMWELL were going with a company of such 
voyagers, and were actually on board ship, when they were stopped 
by a proclamation, prohibiting sea captains to carry out such 
passengers without the royal license.  But O! it would have been 
well for the King if he had let them go!  This was the state of 
England.  If Laud had been a madman just broke loose, he could not 
have done more mischief than he did in Scotland.  In his endeavours 
(in which he was seconded by the King, then in person in that part 
of his dominions) to force his own ideas of bishops, and his own 
religious forms and ceremonies upon the Scotch, he roused that 
nation to a perfect frenzy.  They formed a solemn league, which 
they called The Covenant, for the preservation of their own 
religious forms; they rose in arms throughout the whole country; 
they summoned all their men to prayers and sermons twice a day by 
beat of drum; they sang psalms, in which they compared their 
enemies to all the evil spirits that ever were heard of; and they 
solemnly vowed to smite them with the sword.  At first the King 
tried force, then treaty, then a Scottish Parliament which did not 
answer at all.  Then he tried the EARL OF STRAFFORD, formerly Sir 
Thomas Wentworth; who, as LORD WENTWORTH, had been governing 
Ireland.  He, too, had carried it with a very high hand there, 
though to the benefit and prosperity of that country.

Strafford and Laud were for conquering the Scottish people by force 
of arms.  Other lords who were taken into council, recommended that 
a Parliament should at last be called; to which the King 
unwillingly consented.  So, on the thirteenth of April, one 
thousand six hundred and forty, that then strange sight, a 
Parliament, was seen at Westminster.  It is called the Short 
Parliament, for it lasted a very little while.  While the members 
were all looking at one another, doubtful who would dare to speak, 
MR. PYM arose and set forth all that the King had done unlawfully 
during the past twelve years, and what was the position to which 
England was reduced.  This great example set, other members took 
courage and spoke the truth freely, though with great patience and 
moderation.  The King, a little frightened, sent to say that if 
they would grant him a certain sum on certain terms, no more ship 
money should be raised.  They debated the matter for two days; and 
then, as they would not give him all he asked without promise or 
inquiry, he dissolved them.

But they knew very well that he must have a Parliament now; and he 
began to make that discovery too, though rather late in the day.  
Wherefore, on the twenty-fourth of September, being then at York 
with an army collected against the Scottish people, but his own men 
sullen and discontented like the rest of the nation, the King told 
the great council of the Lords, whom he had called to meet him 
there, that he would summon another Parliament to assemble on the 
third of November.  The soldiers of the Covenant had now forced 
their way into England and had taken possession of the northern 
counties, where the coals are got.  As it would never do to be 
without coals, and as the King's troops could make no head against 
the Covenanters so full of gloomy zeal, a truce was made, and a 
treaty with Scotland was taken into consideration.  Meanwhile the 
northern counties paid the Covenanters to leave the coals alone, 
and keep quiet.

We have now disposed of the Short Parliament.  We have next to see 
what memorable things were done by the Long one.


SECOND PART


THE Long Parliament assembled on the third of November, one 
thousand six hundred and forty-one.  That day week the Earl of 
Strafford arrived from York, very sensible that the spirited and 
determined men who formed that Parliament were no friends towards 
him, who had not only deserted the cause of the people, but who had 
on all occasions opposed himself to their liberties.  The King told 
him, for his comfort, that the Parliament 'should not hurt one hair 
of his head.'  But, on the very next day Mr. Pym, in the House of 
Commons, and with great solemnity, impeached the Earl of Strafford 
as a traitor.  He was immediately taken into custody and fell from 
his proud height.

It was the twenty-second of March before he was brought to trial in 
Westminster Hall; where, although he was very ill and suffered 
great pain, he defended himself with such ability and majesty, that 
it was doubtful whether he would not get the best of it.  But on 
the thirteenth day of the trial, Pym produced in the House of 
Commons a copy of some notes of a council, found by young SIR HARRY 
VANE in a red velvet cabinet belonging to his father (Secretary 
Vane, who sat at the council-table with the Earl), in which 
Strafford had distinctly told the King that he was free from all 
rules and obligations of government, and might do with his people 
whatever he liked; and in which he had added - 'You have an army in 
Ireland that you may employ to reduce this kingdom to obedience.'  
It was not clear whether by the words 'this kingdom,' he had really 
meant England or Scotland; but the Parliament contended that he 
meant England, and this was treason.  At the same sitting of the 
House of Commons it was resolved to bring in a bill of attainder 
declaring the treason to have been committed:  in preference to 
proceeding with the trial by impeachment, which would have required 
the treason to be proved.

So, a bill was brought in at once, was carried through the House of 
Commons by a large majority, and was sent up to the House of Lords.  
While it was still uncertain whether the House of Lords would pass 
it and the King consent to it, Pym disclosed to the House of 
Commons that the King and Queen had both been plotting with the 
officers of the army to bring up the soldiers and control the 
Parliament, and also to introduce two hundred soldiers into the 
Tower of London to effect the Earl's escape.  The plotting with the 
army was revealed by one GEORGE GORING, the son of a lord of that 
name:  a bad fellow who was one of the original plotters, and 
turned traitor.  The King had actually given his warrant for the 
admission of the two hundred men into the Tower, and they would 
have got in too, but for the refusal of the governor - a sturdy 
Scotchman of the name of BALFOUR - to admit them.  These matters 
being made public, great numbers of people began to riot outside 
the Houses of Parliament, and to cry out for the execution of the 
Earl of Strafford, as one of the King's chief instruments against 
them.  The bill passed the House of Lords while the people were in 
this state of agitation, and was laid before the King for his 
assent, together with another bill declaring that the Parliament 
then assembled should not be dissolved or adjourned without their 
own consent.  The King - not unwilling to save a faithful servant, 
though he had no great attachment for him - was in some doubt what 
to do; but he gave his consent to both bills, although he in his 
heart believed that the bill against the Earl of Strafford was 
unlawful and unjust.  The Earl had written to him, telling him that 
he was willing to die for his sake.  But he had not expected that 
his royal master would take him at his word quite so readily; for, 
when he heard his doom, he laid his hand upon his heart, and said, 
'Put not your trust in Princes!'

The King, who never could be straightforward and plain, through one 
single day or through one single sheet of paper, wrote a letter to 
the Lords, and sent it by the young Prince of Wales, entreating 
them to prevail with the Commons that 'that unfortunate man should 
fulfil the natural course of his life in a close imprisonment.'  In 
a postscript to the very same letter, he added, 'If he must die, it 
were charity to reprieve him till Saturday.'  If there had been any 
doubt of his fate, this weakness and meanness would have settled 
it.  The very next day, which was the twelfth of May, he was 
brought out to be beheaded on Tower Hill.

Archbishop Laud, who had been so fond of having people's ears 
cropped off and their noses slit, was now confined in the Tower 
too; and when the Earl went by his window to his death, he was 
there, at his request, to give him his blessing.  They had been 
great friends in the King's cause, and the Earl had written to him 
in the days of their power that he thought it would be an admirable 
thing to have Mr. Hampden publicly whipped for refusing to pay the 
ship money.  However, those high and mighty doings were over now, 
and the Earl went his way to death with dignity and heroism.  The 
governor wished him to get into a coach at the Tower gate, for fear 
the people should tear him to pieces; but he said it was all one to 
him whether he died by the axe or by the people's hands.  So, he 
walked, with a firm tread and a stately look, and sometimes pulled 
off his hat to them as he passed along.  They were profoundly 
quiet.  He made a speech on the scaffold from some notes he had 
prepared (the paper was found lying there after his head was struck 
off), and one blow of the axe killed him, in the forty-ninth year 
of his age.

This bold and daring act, the Parliament accompanied by other 
famous measures, all originating (as even this did) in the King's 
having so grossly and so long abused his power.  The name of 
DELINQUENTS was applied to all sheriffs and other officers who had 
been concerned in raising the ship money, or any other money, from 
the people, in an unlawful manner; the Hampden judgment was 
reversed; the judges who had decided against Hampden were called 
upon to give large securities that they would take such 
consequences as Parliament might impose upon them; and one was 
arrested as he sat in High Court, and carried off to prison.  Laud 
was impeached; the unfortunate victims whose ears had been cropped 
and whose noses had been slit, were brought out of prison in 
triumph; and a bill was passed declaring that a Parliament should 
be called every third year, and that if the King and the King's 
officers did not call it, the people should assemble of themselves 
and summon it, as of their own right and power.  Great 
illuminations and rejoicings took place over all these things, and 
the country was wildly excited.  That the Parliament took advantage 
of this excitement and stirred them up by every means, there is no 
doubt; but you are always to remember those twelve long years, 
during which the King had tried so hard whether he really could do 
any wrong or not.

All this time there was a great religious outcry against the right 
of the Bishops to sit in Parliament; to which the Scottish people 
particularly objected.  The English were divided on this subject, 
and, partly on this account and partly because they had had foolish 
expectations that the Parliament would be able to take off nearly 
all the taxes, numbers of them sometimes wavered and inclined 
towards the King.

I believe myself, that if, at this or almost any other period of 
his life, the King could have been trusted by any man not out of 
his senses, he might have saved himself and kept his throne.  But, 
on the English army being disbanded, he plotted with the officers 
again, as he had done before, and established the fact beyond all 
doubt by putting his signature of approval to a petition against 
the Parliamentary leaders, which was drawn up by certain officers.  
When the Scottish army was disbanded, he went to Edinburgh in four 
days - which was going very fast at that time - to plot again, and 
so darkly too, that it is difficult to decide what his whole object 
was.  Some suppose that he wanted to gain over the Scottish 
Parliament, as he did in fact gain over, by presents and favours, 
many Scottish lords and men of power.  Some think that he went to 
get proofs against the Parliamentary leaders in England of their 
having treasonably invited the Scottish people to come and help 
them.  With whatever object he went to Scotland, he did little good 
by going.  At the instigation of the EARL OF MONTROSE, a desperate 
man who was then in prison for plotting, he tried to kidnap three 
Scottish lords who escaped.  A committee of the Parliament at home, 
who had followed to watch him, writing an account of this INCIDENT, 
as it was called, to the Parliament, the Parliament made a fresh 
stir about it; were, or feigned to be, much alarmed for themselves; 
and wrote to the EARL OF ESSEX, the commander-in-chief, for a guard 
to protect them.

It is not absolutely proved that the King plotted in Ireland 
besides, but it is very probable that he did, and that the Queen 
did, and that he had some wild hope of gaining the Irish people 
over to his side by favouring a rise among them.  Whether or no, 
they did rise in a most brutal and savage rebellion; in which, 
encouraged by their priests, they committed such atrocities upon 
numbers of the English, of both sexes and of all ages, as nobody 
could believe, but for their being related on oath by eye-
witnesses.  Whether one hundred thousand or two hundred thousand 
Protestants were murdered in this outbreak, is uncertain; but, that 
it was as ruthless and barbarous an outbreak as ever was known 
among any savage people, is certain.

The King came home from Scotland, determined to make a great 
struggle for his lost power.  He believed that, through his 
presents and favours, Scotland would take no part against him; and 
the Lord Mayor of London received him with such a magnificent 
dinner that he thought he must have become popular again in 
England.  It would take a good many Lord Mayors, however, to make a 
people, and the King soon found himself mistaken.

Not so soon, though, but that there was a great opposition in the 
Parliament to a celebrated paper put forth by Pym and Hampden and 
the rest, called 'THE REMONSTRANCE,' which set forth all the 
illegal acts that the King had ever done, but politely laid the 
blame of them on his bad advisers.  Even when it was passed and 
presented to him, the King still thought himself strong enough to 
discharge Balfour from his command in the Tower, and to put in his 
place a man of bad character; to whom the Commons instantly 
objected, and whom he was obliged to abandon.  At this time, the 
old outcry about the Bishops became louder than ever, and the old 
Archbishop of York was so near being murdered as he went down to 
the House of Lords - being laid hold of by the mob and violently 
knocked about, in return for very foolishly scolding a shrill boy 
who was yelping out 'No Bishops!' - that he sent for all the 
Bishops who were in town, and proposed to them to sign a 
declaration that, as they could no longer without danger to their 
lives attend their duty in Parliament, they protested against the 
lawfulness of everything done in their absence.  This they asked 
the King to send to the House of Lords, which he did.  Then the 
House of Commons impeached the whole party of Bishops and sent them 
off to the Tower:

Taking no warning from this; but encouraged by there being a 
moderate party in the Parliament who objected to these strong 
measures, the King, on the third of January, one thousand six 
hundred and forty-two, took the rashest step that ever was taken by 
mortal man.

Of his own accord and without advice, he sent the Attorney-General 
to the House of Lords, to accuse of treason certain members of 
Parliament who as popular leaders were the most obnoxious to him; 
LORD KIMBOLTON, SIR ARTHUR HASELRIG, DENZIL HOLLIS, JOHN PYM (they 
used to call him King Pym, he possessed such power and looked so 
big), JOHN HAMPDEN, and WILLIAM STRODE.  The houses of those 
members he caused to be entered, and their papers to be sealed up.  
At the same time, he sent a messenger to the House of Commons 
demanding to have the five gentlemen who were members of that House 
immediately produced.  To this the House replied that they should 
appear as soon as there was any legal charge against them, and 
immediately adjourned.

Next day, the House of Commons send into the City to let the Lord 
Mayor know that their privileges are invaded by the King, and that 
there is no safety for anybody or anything.  Then, when the five 
members are gone out of the way, down comes the King himself, with 
all his guard and from two to three hundred gentlemen and soldiers, 
of whom the greater part were armed.  These he leaves in the hall; 
and then, with his nephew at his side, goes into the House, takes 
off his hat, and walks up to the Speaker's chair.  The Speaker 
leaves it, the King stands in front of it, looks about him steadily 
for a little while, and says he has come for those five members.  
No one speaks, and then he calls John Pym by name.  No one speaks, 
and then he calls Denzil Hollis by name.  No one speaks, and then 
he asks the Speaker of the House where those five members are?  The 
Speaker, answering on his knee, nobly replies that he is the 
servant of that House, and that he has neither eyes to see, nor 
tongue to speak, anything but what the House commands him.  Upon 
this, the King, beaten from that time evermore, replies that he 
will seek them himself, for they have committed treason; and goes 
out, with his hat in his hand, amid some audible murmurs from the 
members.

No words can describe the hurry that arose out of doors when all 
this was known.  The five members had gone for safety to a house in 
Coleman-street, in the City, where they were guarded all night; and 
indeed the whole city watched in arms like an army.  At ten o'clock 
in the morning, the King, already frightened at what he had done, 
came to the Guildhall, with only half a dozen lords, and made a 
speech to the people, hoping they would not shelter those whom he 
accused of treason.  Next day, he issued a proclamation for the 
apprehension of the five members; but the Parliament minded it so 
little that they made great arrangements for having them brought 
down to Westminster in great state, five days afterwards.  The King 
was so alarmed now at his own imprudence, if not for his own 
safety, that he left his palace at Whitehall, and went away with 
his Queen and children to Hampton Court.

It was the eleventh of May, when the five members were carried in 
state and triumph to Westminster.  They were taken by water.  The 
river could not be seen for the boats on it; and the five members 
were hemmed in by barges full of men and great guns, ready to 
protect them, at any cost.  Along the Strand a large body of the 
train-bands of London, under their commander, SKIPPON, marched to 
be ready to assist the little fleet.  Beyond them, came a crowd who 
choked the streets, roaring incessantly about the Bishops and the 
Papists, and crying out contemptuously as they passed Whitehall, 
'What has become of the King?'  With this great noise outside the 
House of Commons, and with great silence within, Mr. Pym rose and 
informed the House of the great kindness with which they had been 
received in the City.  Upon that, the House called the sheriffs in 
and thanked them, and requested the train-bands, under their 
commander Skippon, to guard the House of Commons every day.  Then, 
came four thousand men on horseback out of Buckinghamshire, 
offering their services as a guard too, and bearing a petition to 
the King, complaining of the injury that had been done to Mr. 
Hampden, who was their county man and much beloved and honoured.

When the King set off for Hampton Court, the gentlemen and soldiers 
who had been with him followed him out of town as far as Kingston-
upon-Thames; next day, Lord Digby came to them from the King at 
Hampton Court, in his coach and six, to inform them that the King 
accepted their protection.  This, the Parliament said, was making 
war against the kingdom, and Lord Digby fled abroad.  The 
Parliament then immediately applied themselves to getting hold of 
the military power of the country, well knowing that the King was 
already trying hard to use it against them, and that he had 
secretly sent the Earl of Newcastle to Hull, to secure a valuable 
magazine of arms and gunpowder that was there.  In those times, 
every county had its own magazines of arms and powder, for its own 
train-bands or militia; so, the Parliament brought in a bill 
claiming the right (which up to this time had belonged to the King) 
of appointing the Lord Lieutenants of counties, who commanded these 
train-bands; also, of having all the forts, castles, and garrisons 
in the kingdom, put into the hands of such governors as they, the 
Parliament, could confide in.  It also passed a law depriving the 
Bishops of their votes.  The King gave his assent to that bill, but 
would not abandon the right of appointing the Lord Lieutenants, 
though he said he was willing to appoint such as might be suggested 
to him by the Parliament.  When the Earl of Pembroke asked him 
whether he would not give way on that question for a time, he said, 
'By God! not for one hour!' and upon this he and the Parliament 
went to war.

His young daughter was betrothed to the Prince of Orange.  On 
pretence of taking her to the country of her future husband, the 
Queen was already got safely away to Holland, there to pawn the 
Crown jewels for money to raise an army on the King's side.  The 
Lord Admiral being sick, the House of Commons now named the Earl of 
Warwick to hold his place for a year.  The King named another 
gentleman; the House of Commons took its own way, and the Earl of 
Warwick became Lord Admiral without the King's consent.  The 
Parliament sent orders down to Hull to have that magazine removed 
to London; the King went down to Hull to take it himself.  The 
citizens would not admit him into the town, and the governor would 
not admit him into the castle.  The Parliament resolved that 
whatever the two Houses passed, and the King would not consent to, 
should be called an ORDINANCE, and should be as much a law as if he 
did consent to it.  The King protested against this, and gave 
notice that these ordinances were not to be obeyed.  The King, 
attended by the majority of the House of Peers, and by many members 
of the House of Commons, established himself at York.  The 
Chancellor went to him with the Great Seal, and the Parliament made 
a new Great Seal.  The Queen sent over a ship full of arms and 
ammunition, and the King issued letters to borrow money at high 
interest.  The Parliament raised twenty regiments of foot and 
seventy-five troops of horse; and the people willingly aided them 
with their money, plate, jewellery, and trinkets - the married 
women even with their wedding-rings.  Every member of Parliament 
who could raise a troop or a regiment in his own part of the 
country, dressed it according to his taste and in his own colours, 
and commanded it.  Foremost among them all, OLIVER CROMWELL raised 
a troop of horse - thoroughly in earnest and thoroughly well armed 
- who were, perhaps, the best soldiers that ever were seen.

In some of their proceedings, this famous Parliament passed the 
bounds of previous law and custom, yielded to and favoured riotous 
assemblages of the people, and acted tyrannically in imprisoning 
some who differed from the popular leaders.  But again, you are 
always to remember that the twelve years during which the King had 
had his own wilful way, had gone before; and that nothing could 
make the times what they might, could, would, or should have been, 
if those twelve years had never rolled away.


THIRD PART


I SHALL not try to relate the particulars of the great civil war 
between King Charles the First and the Long Parliament, which 
lasted nearly four years, and a full account of which would fill 
many large books.  It was a sad thing that Englishmen should once 
more be fighting against Englishmen on English ground; but, it is 
some consolation to know that on both sides there was great 
humanity, forbearance, and honour.  The soldiers of the Parliament 
were far more remarkable for these good qualities than the soldiers 
of the King (many of whom fought for mere pay without much caring 
for the cause); but those of the nobility and gentry who were on 
the King's side were so brave, and so faithful to him, that their 
conduct cannot but command our highest admiration.  Among them were 
great numbers of Catholics, who took the royal side because the 
Queen was so strongly of their persuasion.

The King might have distinguished some of these gallant spirits, if 
he had been as generous a spirit himself, by giving them the 
command of his army.  Instead of that, however, true to his old 
high notions of royalty, he entrusted it to his two nephews, PRINCE 
RUPERT and PRINCE MAURICE, who were of royal blood and came over 
from abroad to help him.  It might have been better for him if they 
had stayed away; since Prince Rupert was an impetuous, hot-headed 
fellow, whose only idea was to dash into battle at all times and 
seasons, and lay about him.

The general-in-chief of the Parliamentary army was the Earl of 
Essex, a gentleman of honour and an excellent soldier.  A little 
while before the war broke out, there had been some rioting at 
Westminster between certain officious law students and noisy 
soldiers, and the shopkeepers and their apprentices, and the 
general people in the streets.  At that time the King's friends 
called the crowd, Roundheads, because the apprentices wore short 
hair; the crowd, in return, called their opponents Cavaliers, 
meaning that they were a blustering set, who pretended to be very 
military.  These two words now began to be used to distinguish the 
two sides in the civil war.  The Royalists also called the 
Parliamentary men Rebels and Rogues, while the Parliamentary men 
called THEM Malignants, and spoke of themselves as the Godly, the 
Honest, and so forth.

The war broke out at Portsmouth, where that double traitor Goring 
had again gone over to the King and was besieged by the 
Parliamentary troops.  Upon this, the King proclaimed the Earl of 
Essex and the officers serving under him, traitors, and called upon 
his loyal subjects to meet him in arms at Nottingham on the twenty-
fifth of August.  But his loyal subjects came about him in scanty 
numbers, and it was a windy, gloomy day, and the Royal Standard got 
blown down, and the whole affair was very melancholy.  The chief 
engagements after this, took place in the vale of the Red Horse 
near Banbury, at Brentford, at Devizes, at Chalgrave Field (where 
Mr. Hampden was so sorely wounded while fighting at the head of his 
men, that he died within a week), at Newbury (in which battle LORD 
FALKLAND, one of the best noblemen on the King's side, was killed), 
at Leicester, at Naseby, at Winchester, at Marston Moor near York, 
at Newcastle, and in many other parts of England and Scotland.  
These battles were attended with various successes.  At one time, 
the King was victorious; at another time, the Parliament.  But 
almost all the great and busy towns were against the King; and when 
it was considered necessary to fortify London, all ranks of people, 
from labouring men and women, up to lords and ladies, worked hard 
together with heartiness and good will.  The most distinguished 
leaders on the Parliamentary side were HAMPDEN, SIR THOMAS FAIRFAX, 
and, above all, OLIVER CROMWELL, and his son-in-law IRETON.

During the whole of this war, the people, to whom it was very 
expensive and irksome, and to whom it was made the more distressing 
by almost every family being divided - some of its members 
attaching themselves to one side and some to the other - were over 
and over again most anxious for peace.  So were some of the best 
men in each cause.  Accordingly, treaties of peace were discussed 
between commissioners from the Parliament and the King; at York, at 
Oxford (where the King held a little Parliament of his own), and at 
Uxbridge.  But they came to nothing.  In all these negotiations, 
and in all his difficulties, the King showed himself at his best.  
He was courageous, cool, self-possessed, and clever; but, the old 
taint of his character was always in him, and he was never for one 
single moment to be trusted.  Lord Clarendon, the historian, one of 
his highest admirers, supposes that he had unhappily promised the 
Queen never to make peace without her consent, and that this must 
often be taken as his excuse.  He never kept his word from night to 
morning.  He signed a cessation of hostilities with the blood-
stained Irish rebels for a sum of money, and invited the Irish 
regiments over, to help him against the Parliament.  In the battle 
of Naseby, his cabinet was seized and was found to contain a 
correspondence with the Queen, in which he expressly told her that 
he had deceived the Parliament - a mongrel Parliament, he called it 
now, as an improvement on his old term of vipers - in pretending to 
recognise it and to treat with it; and from which it further 
appeared that he had long been in secret treaty with the Duke of 
Lorraine for a foreign army of ten thousand men.  Disappointed in 
this, he sent a most devoted friend of his, the EARL OF GLAMORGAN, 
to Ireland, to conclude a secret treaty with the Catholic powers, 
to send him an Irish army of ten thousand men; in return for which 
he was to bestow great favours on the Catholic religion.  And, when 
this treaty was discovered in the carriage of a fighting Irish 
Archbishop who was killed in one of the many skirmishes of those 
days, he basely denied and deserted his attached friend, the Earl, 
on his being charged with high treason; and - even worse than this 
- had left blanks in the secret instructions he gave him with his 
own kingly hand, expressly that he might thus save himself.

At last, on the twenty-seventh day of April, one thousand six 
hundred and forty-six, the King found himself in the city of 
Oxford, so surrounded by the Parliamentary army who were closing in 
upon him on all sides that he felt that if he would escape he must 
delay no longer.  So, that night, having altered the cut of his 
hair and beard, he was dressed up as a servant and put upon a horse 
with a cloak strapped behind him, and rode out of the town behind 
one of his own faithful followers, with a clergyman of that country 
who knew the road well, for a guide.  He rode towards London as far 
as Harrow, and then altered his plans and resolved, it would seem, 
to go to the Scottish camp.  The Scottish men had been invited over 
to help the Parliamentary army, and had a large force then in 
England.  The King was so desperately intriguing in everything he 
did, that it is doubtful what he exactly meant by this step.  He 
took it, anyhow, and delivered himself up to the EARL OF LEVEN, the 
Scottish general-in-chief, who treated him as an honourable 
prisoner.  Negotiations between the Parliament on the one hand and 
the Scottish authorities on the other, as to what should be done 
with him, lasted until the following February.  Then, when the King 
had refused to the Parliament the concession of that old militia 
point for twenty years, and had refused to Scotland the recognition 
of its Solemn League and Covenant, Scotland got a handsome sum for 
its army and its help, and the King into the bargain.  He was 
taken, by certain Parliamentary commissioners appointed to receive 
him, to one of his own houses, called Holmby House, near Althorpe, 
in Northamptonshire.

While the Civil War was still in progress, John Pym died, and was 
buried with great honour in Westminster Abbey - not with greater 
honour than he deserved, for the liberties of Englishmen owe a 
mighty debt to Pym and Hampden.  The war was but newly over when 
the Earl of Essex died, of an illness brought on by his having 
overheated himself in a stag hunt in Windsor Forest.  He, too, was 
buried in Westminster Abbey, with great state.  I wish it were not 
necessary to add that Archbishop Laud died upon the scaffold when 
the war was not yet done.  His trial lasted in all nearly a year, 
and, it being doubtful even then whether the charges brought 
against him amounted to treason, the odious old contrivance of the 
worst kings was resorted to, and a bill of attainder was brought in 
against him.  He was a violently prejudiced and mischievous person; 
had had strong ear-cropping and nose-splitting propensities, as you 
know; and had done a world of harm.  But he died peaceably, and 
like a brave old man.


FOURTH PART


WHEN the Parliament had got the King into their hands, they became 
very anxious to get rid of their army, in which Oliver Cromwell had 
begun to acquire great power; not only because of his courage and 
high abilities, but because he professed to be very sincere in the 
Scottish sort of Puritan religion that was then exceedingly popular 
among the soldiers.  They were as much opposed to the Bishops as to 
the Pope himself; and the very privates, drummers, and trumpeters, 
had such an inconvenient habit of starting up and preaching long-
winded discourses, that I would not have belonged to that army on 
any account.

So, the Parliament, being far from sure but that the army might 
begin to preach and fight against them now it had nothing else to 
do, proposed to disband the greater part of it, to send another 
part to serve in Ireland against the rebels, and to keep only a 
small force in England.  But, the army would not consent to be 
broken up, except upon its own conditions; and, when the Parliament 
showed an intention of compelling it, it acted for itself in an 
unexpected manner.  A certain cornet, of the name of JOICE, arrived 
at Holmby House one night, attended by four hundred horsemen, went 
into the King's room with his hat in one hand and a pistol in the 
other, and told the King that he had come to take him away.  The 
King was willing enough to go, and only stipulated that he should 
be publicly required to do so next morning.  Next morning, 
accordingly, he appeared on the top of the steps of the house, and 
asked Comet Joice before his men and the guard set there by the 
Parliament, what authority he had for taking him away?  To this 
Cornet Joice replied, 'The authority of the army.'  'Have you a 
written commission?' said the King.  Joice, pointing to his four 
hundred men on horseback, replied, 'That is my commission.'  
'Well,' said the King, smiling, as if he were pleased, 'I never 
before read such a commission; but it is written in fair and 
legible characters.  This is a company of as handsome proper 
gentlemen as I have seen a long while.'  He was asked where he 
would like to live, and he said at Newmarket.  So, to Newmarket he 
and Cornet Joice and the four hundred horsemen rode; the King 
remarking, in the same smiling way, that he could ride as far at a 
spell as Cornet Joice, or any man there.

The King quite believed, I think, that the army were his friends.  
He said as much to Fairfax when that general, Oliver Cromwell, and 
Ireton, went to persuade him to return to the custody of the 
Parliament.  He preferred to remain as he was, and resolved to 
remain as he was.  And when the army moved nearer and nearer London 
to frighten the Parliament into yielding to their demands, they 
took the King with them.  It was a deplorable thing that England 
should be at the mercy of a great body of soldiers with arms in 
their hands; but the King certainly favoured them at this important 
time of his life, as compared with the more lawful power that tried 
to control him.  It must be added, however, that they treated him, 
as yet, more respectfully and kindly than the Parliament had done.  
They allowed him to be attended by his own servants, to be 
splendidly entertained at various houses, and to see his children - 
at Cavesham House, near Reading - for two days.  Whereas, the 
Parliament had been rather hard with him, and had only allowed him 
to ride out and play at bowls.

It is much to be believed that if the King could have been trusted, 
even at this time, he might have been saved.  Even Oliver Cromwell 
expressly said that he did believe that no man could enjoy his 
possessions in peace, unless the King had his rights.  He was not 
unfriendly towards the King; he had been present when he received 
his children, and had been much affected by the pitiable nature of 
the scene; he saw the King often; he frequently walked and talked 
with him in the long galleries and pleasant gardens of the Palace 
at Hampton Court, whither he was now removed; and in all this 
risked something of his influence with the army.  But, the King was 
in secret hopes of help from the Scottish people; and the moment he 
was encouraged to join them he began to be cool to his new friends, 
the army, and to tell the officers that they could not possibly do 
without him.  At the very time, too, when he was promising to make 
Cromwell and Ireton noblemen, if they would help him up to his old 
height, he was writing to the Queen that he meant to hang them.  
They both afterwards declared that they had been privately informed 
that such a letter would be found, on a certain evening, sewed up 
in a saddle which would be taken to the Blue Boar in Holborn to be 
sent to Dover; and that they went there, disguised as common 
soldiers, and sat drinking in the inn-yard until a man came with 
the saddle, which they ripped up with their knives, and therein 
found the letter.  I see little reason to doubt the story.  It is 
certain that Oliver Cromwell told one of the King's most faithful 
followers that the King could not be trusted, and that he would not 
be answerable if anything amiss were to happen to him.  Still, even 
after that, he kept a promise he had made to the King, by letting 
him know that there was a plot with a certain portion of the army 
to seize him.  I believe that, in fact, he sincerely wanted the 
King to escape abroad, and so to be got rid of without more trouble 
or danger.  That Oliver himself had work enough with the army is 
pretty plain; for some of the troops were so mutinous against him, 
and against those who acted with him at this time, that he found it 
necessary to have one man shot at the head of his regiment to 
overawe the rest.

The King, when he received Oliver's warning, made his escape from 
Hampton Court; after some indecision and uncertainty, he went to 
Carisbrooke Castle in the Isle of Wight.  At first, he was pretty 
free there; but, even there, he carried on a pretended treaty with 
the Parliament, while he was really treating with commissioners 
from Scotland to send an army into England to take his part.  When 
he broke off this treaty with the Parliament (having settled with 
Scotland) and was treated as a prisoner, his treatment was not 
changed too soon, for he had plotted to escape that very night to a 
ship sent by the Queen, which was lying off the island.

He was doomed to be disappointed in his hopes from Scotland.  The 
agreement he had made with the Scottish Commissioners was not 
favourable enough to the religion of that country to please the 
Scottish clergy; and they preached against it.  The consequence 
was, that the army raised in Scotland and sent over, was too small 
to do much; and that, although it was helped by a rising of the 
Royalists in England and by good soldiers from Ireland, it could 
make no head against the Parliamentary army under such men as 
Cromwell and Fairfax.  The King's eldest son, the Prince of Wales, 
came over from Holland with nineteen ships (a part of the English 
fleet having gone over to him) to help his father; but nothing came 
of his voyage, and he was fain to return.  The most remarkable 
event of this second civil war was the cruel execution by the 
Parliamentary General, of SIR CHARLES LUCAS and SIR GEORGE LISLE, 
two grand Royalist generals, who had bravely defended Colchester 
under every disadvantage of famine and distress for nearly three 
months.  When Sir Charles Lucas was shot, Sir George Lisle kissed 
his body, and said to the soldiers who were to shoot him, 'Come 
nearer, and make sure of me.'  'I warrant you, Sir George,' said 
one of the soldiers, 'we shall hit you.'  'AY?' he returned with a 
smile, 'but I have been nearer to you, my friends, many a time, and 
you have missed me.'

The Parliament, after being fearfully bullied by the army - who 
demanded to have seven members whom they disliked given up to them 
- had voted that they would have nothing more to do with the King.  
On the conclusion, however, of this second civil war (which did not 
last more than six months), they appointed commissioners to treat 
with him.  The King, then so far released again as to be allowed to 
live in a private house at Newport in the Isle of Wight, managed 
his own part of the negotiation with a sense that was admired by 
all who saw him, and gave up, in the end, all that was asked of him 
- even yielding (which he had steadily refused, so far) to the 
temporary abolition of the bishops, and the transfer of their 
church land to the Crown.  Still, with his old fatal vice upon him, 
when his best friends joined the commissioners in beseeching him to 
yield all those points as the only means of saving himself from the 
army, he was plotting to escape from the island; he was holding 
correspondence with his friends and the Catholics in Ireland, 
though declaring that he was not; and he was writing, with his own 
hand, that in what he yielded he meant nothing but to get time to 
escape.

Matters were at this pass when the army, resolved to defy the 
Parliament, marched up to London.  The Parliament, not afraid of 
them now, and boldly led by Hollis, voted that the King's 
concessions were sufficient ground for settling the peace of the 
kingdom.  Upon that, COLONEL RICH and COLONEL PRIDE went down to 
the House of Commons with a regiment of horse soldiers and a 
regiment of foot; and Colonel Pride, standing in the lobby with a 
list of the members who were obnoxious to the army in his hand, had 
them pointed out to him as they came through, and took them all 
into custody.  This proceeding was afterwards called by the people, 
for a joke, PRIDE'S PURGE.  Cromwell was in the North, at the head 
of his men, at the time, but when he came home, approved of what 
had been done.

What with imprisoning some members and causing others to stay away, 
the army had now reduced the House of Commons to some fifty or so.  
These soon voted that it was treason in a king to make war against 
his parliament and his people, and sent an ordinance up to the 
House of Lords for the King's being tried as a traitor.  The House 
of Lords, then sixteen in number, to a man rejected it.  Thereupon, 
the Commons made an ordinance of their own, that they were the 
supreme government of the country, and would bring the King to 
trial.

The King had been taken for security to a place called Hurst 
Castle:  a lonely house on a rock in the sea, connected with the 
coast of Hampshire by a rough road two miles long at low water.  
Thence, he was ordered to be removed to Windsor; thence, after 
being but rudely used there, and having none but soldiers to wait 
upon him at table, he was brought up to St. James's Palace in 
London, and told that his trial was appointed for next day.

On Saturday, the twentieth of January, one thousand six hundred and 
forty-nine, this memorable trial began.  The House of Commons had 
settled that one hundred and thirty-five persons should form the 
Court, and these were taken from the House itself, from among the 
officers of the army, and from among the lawyers and citizens.  
JOHN BRADSHAW, serjeant-at-law, was appointed president.  The place 
was Westminster Hall.  At the upper end, in a red velvet chair, sat 
the president, with his hat (lined with plates of iron for his 
protection) on his head.  The rest of the Court sat on side 
benches, also wearing their hats.  The King's seat was covered with 
velvet, like that of the president, and was opposite to it.  He was 
brought from St. James's to Whitehall, and from Whitehall he came 
by water to his trial.

When he came in, he looked round very steadily on the Court, and on 
the great number of spectators, and then sat down:  presently he 
got up and looked round again.  On the indictment 'against Charles 
Stuart, for high treason,' being read, he smiled several times, and 
he denied the authority of the Court, saying that there could be no 
parliament without a House of Lords, and that he saw no House of 
Lords there.  Also, that the King ought to be there, and that he 
saw no King in the King's right place.  Bradshaw replied, that the 
Court was satisfied with its authority, and that its authority was 
God's authority and the kingdom's.  He then adjourned the Court to 
the following Monday.  On that day, the trial was resumed, and went 
on all the week.  When the Saturday came, as the King passed 
forward to his place in the Hall, some soldiers and others cried 
for 'justice!' and execution on him.  That day, too, Bradshaw, like 
an angry Sultan, wore a red robe, instead of the black robe he had 
worn before.  The King was sentenced to death that day.  As he went 
out, one solitary soldier said, 'God bless you, Sir!'  For this, 
his officer struck him.  The King said he thought the punishment 
exceeded the offence.  The silver head of his walking-stick had 
fallen off while he leaned upon it, at one time of the trial.  The 
accident seemed to disturb him, as if he thought it ominous of the 
falling of his own head; and he admitted as much, now it was all 
over.

Being taken back to Whitehall, he sent to the House of Commons, 
saying that as the time of his execution might be nigh, he wished 
he might be allowed to see his darling children.  It was granted.  
On the Monday he was taken back to St. James's; and his two 
children then in England, the PRINCESS ELIZABETH thirteen years 
old, and the DUKE OF GLOUCESTER nine years old, were brought to 
take leave of him, from Sion House, near Brentford.  It was a sad 
and touching scene, when he kissed and fondled those poor children, 
and made a little present of two diamond seals to the Princess, and 
gave them tender messages to their mother (who little deserved 
them, for she had a lover of her own whom she married soon 
afterwards), and told them that he died 'for the laws and liberties 
of the land.'  I am bound to say that I don't think he did, but I 
dare say he believed so.

There were ambassadors from Holland that day, to intercede for the 
unhappy King, whom you and I both wish the Parliament had spared; 
but they got no answer.  The Scottish Commissioners interceded too; 
so did the Prince of Wales, by a letter in which he offered as the 
next heir to the throne, to accept any conditions from the 
Parliament; so did the Queen, by letter likewise.

Notwithstanding all, the warrant for the execution was this day 
signed.  There is a story that as Oliver Cromwell went to the table 
with the pen in his hand to put his signature to it, he drew his 
pen across the face of one of the commissioners, who was standing 
near, and marked it with ink.  That commissioner had not signed his 
own name yet, and the story adds that when he came to do it he 
marked Cromwell's face with ink in the same way.

The King slept well, untroubled by the knowledge that it was his 
last night on earth, and rose on the thirtieth of January, two 
hours before day, and dressed himself carefully.  He put on two 
shirts lest he should tremble with the cold, and had his hair very 
carefully combed.  The warrant had been directed to three officers 
of the army, COLONEL HACKER, COLONEL HUNKS, and COLONEL PHAYER.  At 
ten o'clock, the first of these came to the door and said it was 
time to go to Whitehall.  The King, who had always been a quick 
walker, walked at his usual speed through the Park, and called out 
to the guard, with his accustomed voice of command, 'March on 
apace!'  When he came to Whitehall, he was taken to his own 
bedroom, where a breakfast was set forth.  As he had taken the 
Sacrament, he would eat nothing more; but, at about the time when 
the church bells struck twelve at noon (for he had to wait, through 
the scaffold not being ready), he took the advice of the good 
BISHOP JUXON who was with him, and ate a little bread and drank a 
glass of claret.  Soon after he had taken this refreshment, Colonel 
Hacker came to the chamber with the warrant in his hand, and called 
for Charles Stuart.

And then, through the long gallery of Whitehall Palace, which he 
had often seen light and gay and merry and crowded, in very 
different times, the fallen King passed along, until he came to the 
centre window of the Banqueting House, through which he emerged 
upon the scaffold, which was hung with black.  He looked at the two 
executioners, who were dressed in black and masked; he looked at 
the troops of soldiers on horseback and on foot, and all looked up 
at him in silence; he looked at the vast array of spectators, 
filling up the view beyond, and turning all their faces upon him; 
he looked at his old Palace of St. James's; and he looked at the 
block.  He seemed a little troubled to find that it was so low, and 
asked, 'if there were no place higher?'  Then, to those upon the 
scaffold, he said, 'that it was the Parliament who had begun the 
war, and not he; but he hoped they might be guiltless too, as ill 
instruments had gone between them.  In one respect,' he said, 'he 
suffered justly; and that was because he had permitted an unjust 
sentence to be executed on another.'  In this he referred to the 
Earl of Strafford.

He was not at all afraid to die; but he was anxious to die easily.  
When some one touched the axe while he was speaking, he broke off 
and called out, 'Take heed of the axe! take heed of the axe!'  He 
also said to Colonel Hacker, 'Take care that they do not put me to 
pain.'  He told the executioner, 'I shall say but very short 
prayers, and then thrust out my hands' - as the sign to strike.

He put his hair up, under a white satin cap which the bishop had 
carried, and said, 'I have a good cause and a gracious God on my 
side.'  The bishop told him that he had but one stage more to 
travel in this weary world, and that, though it was a turbulent and 
troublesome stage, it was a short one, and would carry him a great 
way - all the way from earth to Heaven.  The King's last word, as 
he gave his cloak and the George - the decoration from his breast - 
to the bishop, was, 'Remember!'  He then kneeled down, laid his 
head on the block, spread out his hands, and was instantly killed.  
One universal groan broke from the crowd; and the soldiers, who had 
sat on their horses and stood in their ranks immovable as statues, 
were of a sudden all in motion, clearing the streets.

Thus, in the forty-ninth year of his age, falling at the same time 
of his career as Strafford had fallen in his, perished Charles the 
First.  With all my sorrow for him, I cannot agree with him that he 
died 'the martyr of the people;' for the people had been martyrs to 
him, and to his ideas of a King's rights, long before.  Indeed, I 
am afraid that he was but a bad judge of martyrs; for he had called 
that infamous Duke of Buckingham 'the Martyr of his Sovereign.'



CHAPTER XXXIV - ENGLAND UNDER OLIVER CROMWELL



BEFORE sunset on the memorable day on which King Charles the First 
was executed, the House of Commons passed an act declaring it 
treason in any one to proclaim the Prince of Wales - or anybody 
else - King of England.  Soon afterwards, it declared that the 
House of Lords was useless and dangerous, and ought to be 
abolished; and directed that the late King's statue should be taken 
down from the Royal Exchange in the City and other public places.  
Having laid hold of some famous Royalists who had escaped from 
prison, and having beheaded the DUKE OF HAMILTON, LORD HOLLAND, and 
LORD CAPEL, in Palace Yard (all of whom died very courageously), 
they then appointed a Council of State to govern the country.  It 
consisted of forty-one members, of whom five were peers.  Bradshaw 
was made president.  The House of Commons also re-admitted members 
who had opposed the King's death, and made up its numbers to about 
a hundred and fifty.

But, it still had an army of more than forty thousand men to deal 
with, and a very hard task it was to manage them.  Before the 
King's execution, the army had appointed some of its officers to 
remonstrate between them and the Parliament; and now the common 
soldiers began to take that office upon themselves.  The regiments 
under orders for Ireland mutinied; one troop of horse in the city 
of London seized their own flag, and refused to obey orders.  For 
this, the ringleader was shot:  which did not mend the matter, for, 
both his comrades and the people made a public funeral for him, and 
accompanied the body to the grave with sound of trumpets and with a 
gloomy procession of persons carrying bundles of rosemary steeped 
in blood.  Oliver was the only man to deal with such difficulties 
as these, and he soon cut them short by bursting at midnight into 
the town of Burford, near Salisbury, where the mutineers were 
sheltered, taking four hundred of them prisoners, and shooting a 
number of them by sentence of court-martial.  The soldiers soon 
found, as all men did, that Oliver was not a man to be trifled 
with.  And there was an end of the mutiny.

The Scottish Parliament did not know Oliver yet; so, on hearing of 
the King's execution, it proclaimed the Prince of Wales King 
Charles the Second, on condition of his respecting the Solemn 
League and Covenant.  Charles was abroad at that time, and so was 
Montrose, from whose help he had hopes enough to keep him holding 
on and off with commissioners from Scotland, just as his father 
might have done.  These hopes were soon at an end; for, Montrose, 
having raised a few hundred exiles in Germany, and landed with them 
in Scotland, found that the people there, instead of joining him, 
deserted the country at his approach.  He was soon taken prisoner 
and carried to Edinburgh.  There he was received with every 
possible insult, and carried to prison in a cart, his officers 
going two and two before him.  He was sentenced by the Parliament 
to be hanged on a gallows thirty feet high, to have his head set on 
a spike in Edinburgh, and his limbs distributed in other places, 
according to the old barbarous manner.  He said he had always acted 
under the Royal orders, and only wished he had limbs enough to be 
distributed through Christendom, that it might be the more widely 
known how loyal he had been.  He went to the scaffold in a bright 
and brilliant dress, and made a bold end at thirty-eight years of 
age.  The breath was scarcely out of his body when Charles 
abandoned his memory, and denied that he had ever given him orders 
to rise in his behalf.  O the family failing was strong in that 
Charles then!

Oliver had been appointed by the Parliament to command the army in 
Ireland, where he took a terrible vengeance for the sanguinary 
rebellion, and made tremendous havoc, particularly in the siege of 
Drogheda, where no quarter was given, and where he found at least a 
thousand of the inhabitants shut up together in the great church:  
every one of whom was killed by his soldiers, usually known as 
OLIVER'S IRONSIDES.  There were numbers of friars and priests among 
them, and Oliver gruffly wrote home in his despatch that these were 
'knocked on the head' like the rest.

But, Charles having got over to Scotland where the men of the 
Solemn League and Covenant led him a prodigiously dull life and 
made him very weary with long sermons and grim Sundays, the 
Parliament called the redoubtable Oliver home to knock the Scottish 
men on the head for setting up that Prince.  Oliver left his son-
in-law, Ireton, as general in Ireland in his stead (he died there 
afterwards), and he imitated the example of his father-in-law with 
such good will that he brought the country to subjection, and laid 
it at the feet of the Parliament.  In the end, they passed an act 
for the settlement of Ireland, generally pardoning all the common 
people, but exempting from this grace such of the wealthier sort as 
had been concerned in the rebellion, or in any killing of 
Protestants, or who refused to lay down their arms.  Great numbers 
of Irish were got out of the country to serve under Catholic powers 
abroad, and a quantity of land was declared to have been forfeited 
by past offences, and was given to people who had lent money to the 
Parliament early in the war.  These were sweeping measures; but, if 
Oliver Cromwell had had his own way fully, and had stayed in 
Ireland, he would have done more yet.

However, as I have said, the Parliament wanted Oliver for Scotland; 
so, home Oliver came, and was made Commander of all the Forces of 
the Commonwealth of England, and in three days away he went with 
sixteen thousand soldiers to fight the Scottish men.  Now, the 
Scottish men, being then - as you will generally find them now - 
mighty cautious, reflected that the troops they had were not used 
to war like the Ironsides, and would be beaten in an open fight.  
Therefore they said, 'If we live quiet in our trenches in Edinburgh 
here, and if all the farmers come into the town and desert the 
country, the Ironsides will be driven out by iron hunger and be 
forced to go away.'  This was, no doubt, the wisest plan; but as 
the Scottish clergy WOULD interfere with what they knew nothing 
about, and would perpetually preach long sermons exhorting the 
soldiers to come out and fight, the soldiers got it in their heads 
that they absolutely must come out and fight.  Accordingly, in an 
evil hour for themselves, they came out of their safe position.  
Oliver fell upon them instantly, and killed three thousand, and 
took ten thousand prisoners.

To gratify the Scottish Parliament, and preserve their favour, 
Charles had signed a declaration they laid before him, reproaching 
the memory of his father and mother, and representing himself as a 
most religious Prince, to whom the Solemn League and Covenant was 
as dear as life.  He meant no sort of truth in this, and soon 
afterwards galloped away on horseback to join some tiresome 
Highland friends, who were always flourishing dirks and 
broadswords.  He was overtaken and induced to return; but this 
attempt, which was called 'The Start,' did him just so much 
service, that they did not preach quite such long sermons at him 
afterwards as they had done before.

On the first of January, one thousand six hundred and fifty-one, 
the Scottish people crowned him at Scone.  He immediately took the 
chief command of an army of twenty thousand men, and marched to 
Stirling.  His hopes were heightened, I dare say, by the 
redoubtable Oliver being ill of an ague; but Oliver scrambled out 
of bed in no time, and went to work with such energy that he got 
behind the Royalist army and cut it off from all communication with 
Scotland.  There was nothing for it then, but to go on to England; 
so it went on as far as Worcester, where the mayor and some of the 
gentry proclaimed King Charles the Second straightway.  His 
proclamation, however, was of little use to him, for very few 
Royalists appeared; and, on the very same day, two people were 
publicly beheaded on Tower Hill for espousing his cause.  Up came 
Oliver to Worcester too, at double quick speed, and he and his 
Ironsides so laid about them in the great battle which was fought 
there, that they completely beat the Scottish men, and destroyed 
the Royalist army; though the Scottish men fought so gallantly that 
it took five hours to do.

The escape of Charles after this battle of Worcester did him good 
service long afterwards, for it induced many of the generous 
English people to take a romantic interest in him, and to think 
much better of him than he ever deserved.  He fled in the night, 
with not more than sixty followers, to the house of a Catholic lady 
in Staffordshire.  There, for his greater safety, the whole sixty 
left him.  He cropped his hair, stained his face and hands brown as 
if they were sunburnt, put on the clothes of a labouring 
countryman, and went out in the morning with his axe in his hand, 
accompanied by four wood-cutters who were brothers, and another man 
who was their brother-in-law.  These good fellows made a bed for 
him under a tree, as the weather was very bad; and the wife of one 
of them brought him food to eat; and the old mother of the four 
brothers came and fell down on her knees before him in the wood, 
and thanked God that her sons were engaged in saving his life.  At 
night, he came out of the forest and went on to another house which 
was near the river Severn, with the intention of passing into 
Wales; but the place swarmed with soldiers, and the bridges were 
guarded, and all the boats were made fast.  So, after lying in a 
hayloft covered over with hay, for some time, he came out of his 
place, attended by COLONEL CARELESS, a Catholic gentleman who had 
met him there, and with whom he lay hid, all next day, up in the 
shady branches of a fine old oak.  It was lucky for the King that 
it was September-time, and that the leaves had not begun to fall, 
since he and the Colonel, perched up in this tree, could catch 
glimpses of the soldiers riding about below, and could hear the 
crash in the wood as they went about beating the boughs.

After this, he walked and walked until his feet were all blistered; 
and, having been concealed all one day in a house which was 
searched by the troopers while he was there, went with LORD WILMOT, 
another of his good friends, to a place called Bentley, where one 
MISS LANE, a Protestant lady, had obtained a pass to be allowed to 
ride through the guards to see a relation of hers near Bristol.  
Disguised as a servant, he rode in the saddle before this young 
lady to the house of SIR JOHN WINTER, while Lord Wilmot rode there 
boldly, like a plain country gentleman, with dogs at his heels.  It 
happened that Sir John Winter's butler had been servant in Richmond 
Palace, and knew Charles the moment he set eyes upon him; but, the 
butler was faithful and kept the secret.  As no ship could be found 
to carry him abroad, it was planned that he should go - still 
travelling with Miss Lane as her servant - to another house, at 
Trent near Sherborne in Dorsetshire; and then Miss Lane and her 
cousin, MR. LASCELLES, who had gone on horseback beside her all the 
way, went home.  I hope Miss Lane was going to marry that cousin, 
for I am sure she must have been a brave, kind girl.  If I had been 
that cousin, I should certainly have loved Miss Lane.

When Charles, lonely for the loss of Miss Lane, was safe at Trent, 
a ship was hired at Lyme, the master of which engaged to take two 
gentlemen to France.  In the evening of the same day, the King - 
now riding as servant before another young lady - set off for a 
public-house at a place called Charmouth, where the captain of the 
vessel was to take him on board.  But, the captain's wife, being 
afraid of her husband getting into trouble, locked him up and would 
not let him sail.  Then they went away to Bridport; and, coming to 
the inn there, found the stable-yard full of soldiers who were on 
the look-out for Charles, and who talked about him while they 
drank.  He had such presence of mind, that he led the horses of his 
party through the yard as any other servant might have done, and 
said, 'Come out of the way, you soldiers; let us have room to pass 
here!'  As he went along, he met a half-tipsy ostler, who rubbed 
his eyes and said to him, 'Why, I was formerly servant to Mr. 
Potter at Exeter, and surely I have sometimes seen you there, young 
man?'  He certainly had, for Charles had lodged there.  His ready 
answer was, 'Ah, I did live with him once; but I have no time to 
talk now.  We'll have a pot of beer together when I come back.'

From this dangerous place he returned to Trent, and lay there 
concealed several days.  Then he escaped to Heale, near Salisbury; 
where, in the house of a widow lady, he was hidden five days, until 
the master of a collier lying off Shoreham in Sussex, undertook to 
convey a 'gentleman' to France.  On the night of the fifteenth of 
October, accompanied by two colonels and a merchant, the King rode 
to Brighton, then a little fishing village, to give the captain of 
the ship a supper before going on board; but, so many people knew 
him, that this captain knew him too, and not only he, but the 
landlord and landlady also.  Before he went away, the landlord came 
behind his chair, kissed his hand, and said he hoped to live to be 
a lord and to see his wife a lady; at which Charles laughed.  They 
had had a good supper by this time, and plenty of smoking and 
drinking, at which the King was a first-rate hand; so, the captain 
assured him that he would stand by him, and he did.  It was agreed 
that the captain should pretend to sail to Deal, and that Charles 
should address the sailors and say he was a gentleman in debt who 
was running away from his creditors, and that he hoped they would 
join him in persuading the captain to put him ashore in France.  As 
the King acted his part very well indeed, and gave the sailors 
twenty shillings to drink, they begged the captain to do what such 
a worthy gentleman asked.  He pretended to yield to their 
entreaties, and the King got safe to Normandy.

Ireland being now subdued, and Scotland kept quiet by plenty of 
forts and soldiers put there by Oliver, the Parliament would have 
gone on quietly enough, as far as fighting with any foreign enemy 
went, but for getting into trouble with the Dutch, who in the 
spring of the year one thousand six hundred and fifty-one sent a 
fleet into the Downs under their ADMIRAL VAN TROMP, to call upon 
the bold English ADMIRAL BLAKE (who was there with half as many 
ships as the Dutch) to strike his flag.  Blake fired a raging 
broadside instead, and beat off Van Tromp; who, in the autumn, came 
back again with seventy ships, and challenged the bold Blake - who 
still was only half as strong - to fight him.  Blake fought him all 
day; but, finding that the Dutch were too many for him, got quietly 
off at night.  What does Van Tromp upon this, but goes cruising and 
boasting about the Channel, between the North Foreland and the Isle 
of Wight, with a great Dutch broom tied to his masthead, as a sign 
that he could and would sweep the English of the sea!  Within three 
months, Blake lowered his tone though, and his broom too; for, he 
and two other bold commanders, DEAN and MONK, fought him three 
whole days, took twenty-three of his ships, shivered his broom to 
pieces, and settled his business.

Things were no sooner quiet again, than the army began to complain 
to the Parliament that they were not governing the nation properly, 
and to hint that they thought they could do it better themselves.  
Oliver, who had now made up his mind to be the head of the state, 
or nothing at all, supported them in this, and called a meeting of 
officers and his own Parliamentary friends, at his lodgings in 
Whitehall, to consider the best way of getting rid of the 
Parliament.  It had now lasted just as many years as the King's 
unbridled power had lasted, before it came into existence.  The end 
of the deliberation was, that Oliver went down to the House in his 
usual plain black dress, with his usual grey worsted stockings, but 
with an unusual party of soldiers behind him.  These last he left 
in the lobby, and then went in and sat down.  Presently he got up, 
made the Parliament a speech, told them that the Lord had done with 
them, stamped his foot and said, 'You are no Parliament.  Bring 
them in!  Bring them in!'  At this signal the door flew open, and 
the soldiers appeared.  'This is not honest,' said Sir Harry Vane, 
one of the members.  'Sir Harry Vane!' cried Cromwell; 'O, Sir 
Harry Vane!  The Lord deliver me from Sir Harry Vane!'  Then he 
pointed out members one by one, and said this man was a drunkard, 
and that man a dissipated fellow, and that man a liar, and so on.  
Then he caused the Speaker to be walked out of his chair, told the 
guard to clear the House, called the mace upon the table - which is 
a sign that the House is sitting - 'a fool's bauble,' and said, 
'here, carry it away!'  Being obeyed in all these orders, he 
quietly locked the door, put the key in his pocket, walked back to 
Whitehall again, and told his friends, who were still assembled 
there, what he had done.

They formed a new Council of State after this extraordinary 
proceeding, and got a new Parliament together in their own way:  
which Oliver himself opened in a sort of sermon, and which he said 
was the beginning of a perfect heaven upon earth.  In this 
Parliament there sat a well-known leather-seller, who had taken the 
singular name of Praise God Barebones, and from whom it was called, 
for a joke, Barebones's Parliament, though its general name was the 
Little Parliament.  As it soon appeared that it was not going to 
put Oliver in the first place, it turned out to be not at all like 
the beginning of heaven upon earth, and Oliver said it really was 
not to be borne with.  So he cleared off that Parliament in much 
the same way as he had disposed of the other; and then the council 
of officers decided that he must be made the supreme authority of 
the kingdom, under the title of the Lord Protector of the 
Commonwealth.

So, on the sixteenth of December, one thousand six hundred and 
fifty-three, a great procession was formed at Oliver's door, and he 
came out in a black velvet suit and a big pair of boots, and got 
into his coach and went down to Westminster, attended by the 
judges, and the lord mayor, and the aldermen, and all the other 
great and wonderful personages of the country.  There, in the Court 
of Chancery, he publicly accepted the office of Lord Protector.  
Then he was sworn, and the City sword was handed to him, and the 
seal was handed to him, and all the other things were handed to him 
which are usually handed to Kings and Queens on state occasions.  
When Oliver had handed them all back, he was quite made and 
completely finished off as Lord Protector; and several of the 
Ironsides preached about it at great length, all the evening.


SECOND PART


OLIVER CROMWELL - whom the people long called OLD NOLL - in 
accepting the office of Protector, had bound himself by a certain 
paper which was handed to him, called 'the Instrument,' to summon a 
Parliament, consisting of between four and five hundred members, in 
the election of which neither the Royalists nor the Catholics were 
to have any share.  He had also pledged himself that this 
Parliament should not be dissolved without its own consent until it 
had sat five months.

When this Parliament met, Oliver made a speech to them of three 
hours long, very wisely advising them what to do for the credit and 
happiness of the country.  To keep down the more violent members, 
he required them to sign a recognition of what they were forbidden 
by 'the Instrument' to do; which was, chiefly, to take the power 
from one single person at the head of the state or to command the 
army.  Then he dismissed them to go to work.  With his usual vigour 
and resolution he went to work himself with some frantic preachers 
- who were rather overdoing their sermons in calling him a villain 
and a tyrant - by shutting up their chapels, and sending a few of 
them off to prison.

There was not at that time, in England or anywhere else, a man so 
able to govern the country as Oliver Cromwell.  Although he ruled 
with a strong hand, and levied a very heavy tax on the Royalists 
(but not until they had plotted against his life), he ruled wisely, 
and as the times required.  He caused England to be so respected 
abroad, that I wish some lords and gentlemen who have governed it 
under kings and queens in later days would have taken a leaf out of 
Oliver Cromwell's book.  He sent bold Admiral Blake to the 
Mediterranean Sea, to make the Duke of Tuscany pay sixty thousand 
pounds for injuries he had done to British subjects, and spoliation 
he had committed on English merchants.  He further despatched him 
and his fleet to Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoli, to have every English 
ship and every English man delivered up to him that had been taken 
by pirates in those parts.  All this was gloriously done; and it 
began to be thoroughly well known, all over the world, that England 
was governed by a man in earnest, who would not allow the English 
name to be insulted or slighted anywhere.

These were not all his foreign triumphs.  He sent a fleet to sea 
against the Dutch; and the two powers, each with one hundred ships 
upon its side, met in the English Channel off the North Foreland, 
where the fight lasted all day long.  Dean was killed in this 
fight; but Monk, who commanded in the same ship with him, threw his 
cloak over his body, that the sailors might not know of his death, 
and be disheartened.  Nor were they.  The English broadsides so 
exceedingly astonished the Dutch that they sheered off at last, 
though the redoubtable Van Tromp fired upon them with his own guns 
for deserting their flag.  Soon afterwards, the two fleets engaged 
again, off the coast of Holland.  There, the valiant Van Tromp was 
shot through the heart, and the Dutch gave in, and peace was made.

Further than this, Oliver resolved not to bear the domineering and 
bigoted conduct of Spain, which country not only claimed a right to 
all the gold and silver that could be found in South America, and 
treated the ships of all other countries who visited those regions, 
as pirates, but put English subjects into the horrible Spanish 
prisons of the Inquisition.  So, Oliver told the Spanish ambassador 
that English ships must be free to go wherever they would, and that 
English merchants must not be thrown into those same dungeons, no, 
not for the pleasure of all the priests in Spain.  To this, the 
Spanish ambassador replied that the gold and silver country, and 
the Holy Inquisition, were his King's two eyes, neither of which he 
could submit to have put out.  Very well, said Oliver, then he was 
afraid he (Oliver) must damage those two eyes directly.

So, another fleet was despatched under two commanders, PENN and 
VENABLES, for Hispaniola; where, however, the Spaniards got the 
better of the fight.  Consequently, the fleet came home again, 
after taking Jamaica on the way.  Oliver, indignant with the two 
commanders who had not done what bold Admiral Blake would have 
done, clapped them both into prison, declared war against Spain, 
and made a treaty with France, in virtue of which it was to shelter 
the King and his brother the Duke of York no longer.  Then, he sent 
a fleet abroad under bold Admiral Blake, which brought the King of 
Portugal to his senses - just to keep its hand in - and then 
engaged a Spanish fleet, sunk four great ships, and took two more, 
laden with silver to the value of two millions of pounds:  which 
dazzling prize was brought from Portsmouth to London in waggons, 
with the populace of all the towns and villages through which the 
waggons passed, shouting with all their might.  After this victory, 
bold Admiral Blake sailed away to the port of Santa Cruz to cut off 
the Spanish treasure-ships coming from Mexico.  There, he found 
them, ten in number, with seven others to take care of them, and a 
big castle, and seven batteries, all roaring and blazing away at 
him with great guns.  Blake cared no more for great guns than for 
pop-guns - no more for their hot iron balls than for snow-balls.  
He dashed into the harbour, captured and burnt every one of the 
ships, and came sailing out again triumphantly, with the victorious 
English flag flying at his masthead.  This was the last triumph of 
this great commander, who had sailed and fought until he was quite 
worn out.  He died, as his successful ship was coming into Plymouth 
Harbour amidst the joyful acclamations of the people, and was 
buried in state in Westminster Abbey.  Not to lie there, long.

Over and above all this, Oliver found that the VAUDOIS, or 
Protestant people of the valleys of Lucerne, were insolently 
treated by the Catholic powers, and were even put to death for 
their religion, in an audacious and bloody manner.  Instantly, he 
informed those powers that this was a thing which Protestant 
England would not allow; and he speedily carried his point, through 
the might of his great name, and established their right to worship 
God in peace after their own harmless manner.

Lastly, his English army won such admiration in fighting with the 
French against the Spaniards, that, after they had assaulted the 
town of Dunkirk together, the French King in person gave it up to 
the English, that it might be a token to them of their might and 
valour.

There were plots enough against Oliver among the frantic 
religionists (who called themselves Fifth Monarchy Men), and among 
the disappointed Republicans.  He had a difficult game to play, for 
the Royalists were always ready to side with either party against 
him.  The 'King over the water,' too, as Charles was called, had no 
scruples about plotting with any one against his life; although 
there is reason to suppose that he would willingly have married one 
of his daughters, if Oliver would have had such a son-in-law.  
There was a certain COLONEL SAXBY of the army, once a great 
supporter of Oliver's but now turned against him, who was a 
grievous trouble to him through all this part of his career; and 
who came and went between the discontented in England and Spain, 
and Charles who put himself in alliance with Spain on being thrown 
off by France.  This man died in prison at last; but not until 
there had been very serious plots between the Royalists and 
Republicans, and an actual rising of them in England, when they 
burst into the city of Salisbury, on a Sunday night, seized the 
judges who were going to hold the assizes there next day, and would 
have hanged them but for the merciful objections of the more 
temperate of their number.  Oliver was so vigorous and shrewd that 
he soon put this revolt down, as he did most other conspiracies; 
and it was well for one of its chief managers - that same Lord 
Wilmot who had assisted in Charles's flight, and was now EARL OF 
ROCHESTER - that he made his escape.  Oliver seemed to have eyes 
and ears everywhere, and secured such sources of information as his 
enemies little dreamed of.  There was a chosen body of six persons, 
called the Sealed Knot, who were in the closest and most secret 
confidence of Charles.  One of the foremost of these very men, a 
SIR RICHARD WILLIS, reported to Oliver everything that passed among 
them, and had two hundred a year for it.

MILES SYNDARCOMB, also of the old army, was another conspirator 
against the Protector.  He and a man named CECIL, bribed one of his 
Life Guards to let them have good notice when he was going out - 
intending to shoot him from a window.  But, owing either to his 
caution or his good fortune, they could never get an aim at him.  
Disappointed in this design, they got into the chapel in Whitehall, 
with a basketful of combustibles, which were to explode by means of 
a slow match in six hours; then, in the noise and confusion of the 
fire, they hoped to kill Oliver.  But, the Life Guardsman himself 
disclosed this plot; and they were seized, and Miles died (or 
killed himself in prison) a little while before he was ordered for 
execution.  A few such plotters Oliver caused to be beheaded, a few 
more to be hanged, and many more, including those who rose in arms 
against him, to be sent as slaves to the West Indies.  If he were 
rigid, he was impartial too, in asserting the laws of England.  
When a Portuguese nobleman, the brother of the Portuguese 
ambassador, killed a London citizen in mistake for another man with 
whom he had had a quarrel, Oliver caused him to be tried before a 
jury of Englishmen and foreigners, and had him executed in spite of 
the entreaties of all the ambassadors in London.

One of Oliver's own friends, the DUKE OF OLDENBURGH, in sending him 
a present of six fine coach-horses, was very near doing more to 
please the Royalists than all the plotters put together.  One day, 
Oliver went with his coach, drawn by these six horses, into Hyde 
Park, to dine with his secretary and some of his other gentlemen 
under the trees there.  After dinner, being merry, he took it into 
his head to put his friends inside and to drive them home:  a 
postillion riding one of the foremost horses, as the custom was.  
On account of Oliver's being too free with the whip, the six fine 
horses went off at a gallop, the postillion got thrown, and Oliver 
fell upon the coach-pole and narrowly escaped being shot by his own 
pistol, which got entangled with his clothes in the harness, and 
went off.  He was dragged some distance by the foot, until his foot 
came out of the shoe, and then he came safely to the ground under 
the broad body of the coach, and was very little the worse.  The 
gentlemen inside were only bruised, and the discontented people of 
all parties were much disappointed.

The rest of the history of the Protectorate of Oliver Cromwell is a 
history of his Parliaments.  His first one not pleasing him at all, 
he waited until the five months were out, and then dissolved it.  
The next was better suited to his views; and from that he desired 
to get - if he could with safety to himself - the title of King.  
He had had this in his mind some time:  whether because he thought 
that the English people, being more used to the title, were more 
likely to obey it; or whether because he really wished to be a king 
himself, and to leave the succession to that title in his family, 
is far from clear.  He was already as high, in England and in all 
the world, as he would ever be, and I doubt if he cared for the 
mere name.  However, a paper, called the 'Humble Petition and 
Advice,' was presented to him by the House of Commons, praying him 
to take a high title and to appoint his successor.  That he would 
have taken the title of King there is no doubt, but for the strong 
opposition of the army.  This induced him to forbear, and to assent 
only to the other points of the petition.  Upon which occasion 
there was another grand show in Westminster Hall, when the Speaker 
of the House of Commons formally invested him with a purple robe 
lined with ermine, and presented him with a splendidly bound Bible, 
and put a golden sceptre in his hand.  The next time the Parliament 
met, he called a House of Lords of sixty members, as the petition 
gave him power to do; but as that Parliament did not please him 
either, and would not proceed to the business of the country, he 
jumped into a coach one morning, took six Guards with him, and sent 
them to the right-about.  I wish this had been a warning to 
Parliaments to avoid long speeches, and do more work.

It was the month of August, one thousand six hundred and fifty-
eight, when Oliver Cromwell's favourite daughter, ELIZABETH 
CLAYPOLE (who had lately lost her youngest son), lay very ill, and 
his mind was greatly troubled, because he loved her dearly.  
Another of his daughters was married to LORD FALCONBERG, another to 
the grandson of the Earl of Warwick, and he had made his son 
RICHARD one of the Members of the Upper House.  He was very kind 
and loving to them all, being a good father and a good husband; but 
he loved this daughter the best of the family, and went down to 
Hampton Court to see her, and could hardly be induced to stir from 
her sick room until she died.  Although his religion had been of a 
gloomy kind, his disposition had been always cheerful.  He had been 
fond of music in his home, and had kept open table once a week for 
all officers of the army not below the rank of captain, and had 
always preserved in his house a quiet, sensible dignity.  He 
encouraged men of genius and learning, and loved to have them about 
him.  MILTON was one of his great friends.  He was good humoured 
too, with the nobility, whose dresses and manners were very 
different from his; and to show them what good information he had, 
he would sometimes jokingly tell them when they were his guests, 
where they had last drunk the health of the 'King over the water,' 
and would recommend them to be more private (if they could) another 
time.  But he had lived in busy times, had borne the weight of 
heavy State affairs, and had often gone in fear of his life.  He 
was ill of the gout and ague; and when the death of his beloved 
child came upon him in addition, he sank, never to raise his head 
again.  He told his physicians on the twenty-fourth of August that 
the Lord had assured him that he was not to die in that illness, 
and that he would certainly get better.  This was only his sick 
fancy, for on the third of September, which was the anniversary of 
the great battle of Worcester, and the day of the year which he 
called his fortunate day, he died, in the sixtieth year of his age.  
He had been delirious, and had lain insensible some hours, but he 
had been overheard to murmur a very good prayer the day before.  
The whole country lamented his death.  If you want to know the real 
worth of Oliver Cromwell, and his real services to his country, you 
can hardly do better than compare England under him, with England 
under CHARLES THE SECOND.

He had appointed his son Richard to succeed him, and after there 
had been, at Somerset House in the Strand, a lying in state more 
splendid than sensible - as all such vanities after death are, I 
think - Richard became Lord Protector.  He was an amiable country 
gentleman, but had none of his father's great genius, and was quite 
unfit for such a post in such a storm of parties.  Richard's 
Protectorate, which only lasted a year and a half, is a history of 
quarrels between the officers of the army and the Parliament, and 
between the officers among themselves; and of a growing discontent 
among the people, who had far too many long sermons and far too few 
amusements, and wanted a change.  At last, General Monk got the 
army well into his own hands, and then in pursuance of a secret 
plan he seems to have entertained from the time of Oliver's death, 
declared for the King's cause.  He did not do this openly; but, in 
his place in the House of Commons, as one of the members for 
Devonshire, strongly advocated the proposals of one SIR JOHN 
GREENVILLE, who came to the House with a letter from Charles, dated 
from Breda, and with whom he had previously been in secret 
communication.  There had been plots and counterplots, and a recall 
of the last members of the Long Parliament, and an end of the Long 
Parliament, and risings of the Royalists that were made too soon; 
and most men being tired out, and there being no one to head the 
country now great Oliver was dead, it was readily agreed to welcome 
Charles Stuart.  Some of the wiser and better members said - what 
was most true - that in the letter from Breda, he gave no real 
promise to govern well, and that it would be best to make him 
pledge himself beforehand as to what he should be bound to do for 
the benefit of the kingdom.  Monk said, however, it would be all 
right when he came, and he could not come too soon.

So, everybody found out all in a moment that the country MUST be 
prosperous and happy, having another Stuart to condescend to reign 
over it; and there was a prodigious firing off of guns, lighting of 
bonfires, ringing of bells, and throwing up of caps.  The people 
drank the King's health by thousands in the open streets, and 
everybody rejoiced.  Down came the Arms of the Commonwealth, up 
went the Royal Arms instead, and out came the public money.  Fifty 
thousand pounds for the King, ten thousand pounds for his brother 
the Duke of York, five thousand pounds for his brother the Duke of 
Gloucester.  Prayers for these gracious Stuarts were put up in all 
the churches; commissioners were sent to Holland (which suddenly 
found out that Charles was a great man, and that it loved him) to 
invite the King home; Monk and the Kentish grandees went to Dover, 
to kneel down before him as he landed.  He kissed and embraced 
Monk, made him ride in the coach with himself and his brothers, 
came on to London amid wonderful shoutings, and passed through the 
army at Blackheath on the twenty-ninth of May (his birthday), in 
the year one thousand six hundred and sixty.  Greeted by splendid 
dinners under tents, by flags and tapestry streaming from all the 
houses, by delighted crowds in all the streets, by troops of 
noblemen and gentlemen in rich dresses, by City companies, train-
bands, drummers, trumpeters, the great Lord Mayor, and the majestic 
Aldermen, the King went on to Whitehall.  On entering it, he 
commemorated his Restoration with the joke that it really would 
seem to have been his own fault that he had not come long ago, 
since everybody told him that he had always wished for him with all 
his heart.



CHAPTER XXXV - ENGLAND UNDER CHARLES THE SECOND, CALLED THE MERRY 
MONARCH



THERE never were such profligate times in England as under Charles 
the Second.  Whenever you see his portrait, with his swarthy, ill-
looking face and great nose, you may fancy him in his Court at 
Whitehall, surrounded by some of the very worst vagabonds in the 
kingdom (though they were lords and ladies), drinking, gambling, 
indulging in vicious conversation, and committing every kind of 
profligate excess.  It has been a fashion to call Charles the 
Second 'The Merry Monarch.'  Let me try to give you a general idea 
of some of the merry things that were done, in the merry days when 
this merry gentleman sat upon his merry throne, in merry England.

The first merry proceeding was - of course - to declare that he was 
one of the greatest, the wisest, and the noblest kings that ever 
shone, like the blessed sun itself, on this benighted earth.  The 
next merry and pleasant piece of business was, for the Parliament, 
in the humblest manner, to give him one million two hundred 
thousand pounds a year, and to settle upon him for life that old 
disputed tonnage and poundage which had been so bravely fought for.  
Then, General Monk being made EARL OF ALBEMARLE, and a few other 
Royalists similarly rewarded, the law went to work to see what was 
to be done to those persons (they were called Regicides) who had 
been concerned in making a martyr of the late King.  Ten of these 
were merrily executed; that is to say, six of the judges, one of 
the council, Colonel Hacker and another officer who had commanded 
the Guards, and HUGH PETERS, a preacher who had preached against 
the martyr with all his heart.  These executions were so extremely 
merry, that every horrible circumstance which Cromwell had 
abandoned was revived with appalling cruelty.  The hearts of the 
sufferers were torn out of their living bodies; their bowels were 
burned before their faces; the executioner cut jokes to the next 
victim, as he rubbed his filthy hands together, that were reeking 
with the blood of the last; and the heads of the dead were drawn on 
sledges with the living to the place of suffering.  Still, even so 
merry a monarch could not force one of these dying men to say that 
he was sorry for what he had done.  Nay, the most memorable thing 
said among them was, that if the thing were to do again they would 
do it.

Sir Harry Vane, who had furnished the evidence against Strafford, 
and was one of the most staunch of the Republicans, was also tried, 
found guilty, and ordered for execution.  When he came upon the 
scaffold on Tower Hill, after conducting his own defence with great 
power, his notes of what he had meant to say to the people were 
torn away from him, and the drums and trumpets were ordered to 
sound lustily and drown his voice; for, the people had been so much 
impressed by what the Regicides had calmly said with their last 
breath, that it was the custom now, to have the drums and trumpets 
always under the scaffold, ready to strike up.  Vane said no more 
than this:  'It is a bad cause which cannot bear the words of a 
dying man:' and bravely died.

These merry scenes were succeeded by another, perhaps even merrier.  
On the anniversary of the late King's death, the bodies of Oliver 
Cromwell, Ireton, and Bradshaw, were torn out of their graves in 
Westminster Abbey, dragged to Tyburn, hanged there on a gallows all 
day long, and then beheaded.  Imagine the head of Oliver Cromwell 
set upon a pole to be stared at by a brutal crowd, not one of whom 
would have dared to look the living Oliver in the face for half a 
moment!  Think, after you have read this reign, what England was 
under Oliver Cromwell who was torn out of his grave, and what it 
was under this merry monarch who sold it, like a merry Judas, over 
and over again.

Of course, the remains of Oliver's wife and daughter were not to be 
spared either, though they had been most excellent women.  The base 
clergy of that time gave up their bodies, which had been buried in 
the Abbey, and - to the eternal disgrace of England - they were 
thrown into a pit, together with the mouldering bones of Pym and of 
the brave and bold old Admiral Blake.

The clergy acted this disgraceful part because they hoped to get 
the nonconformists, or dissenters, thoroughly put down in this 
reign, and to have but one prayer-book and one service for all 
kinds of people, no matter what their private opinions were.  This 
was pretty well, I think, for a Protestant Church, which had 
displaced the Romish Church because people had a right to their own 
opinions in religious matters.  However, they carried it with a 
high hand, and a prayer-book was agreed upon, in which the 
extremest opinions of Archbishop Laud were not forgotten.  An Act 
was passed, too, preventing any dissenter from holding any office 
under any corporation.  So, the regular clergy in their triumph 
were soon as merry as the King.  The army being by this time 
disbanded, and the King crowned, everything was to go on easily for 
evermore.

I must say a word here about the King's family.  He had not been 
long upon the throne when his brother the Duke of Gloucester, and 
his sister the PRINCESS OF ORANGE, died within a few months of each 
other, of small-pox.  His remaining sister, the PRINCESS HENRIETTA, 
married the DUKE OF ORLEANS, the brother of LOUIS THE FOURTEENTH, 
King of France.  His brother JAMES, DUKE OF YORK, was made High 
Admiral, and by-and-by became a Catholic.  He was a gloomy, sullen, 
bilious sort of man, with a remarkable partiality for the ugliest 
women in the country.  He married, under very discreditable 
circumstances, ANNE HYDE, the daughter of LORD CLARENDON, then the 
King's principal Minister - not at all a delicate minister either, 
but doing much of the dirty work of a very dirty palace.  It became 
important now that the King himself should be married; and divers 
foreign Monarchs, not very particular about the character of their 
son-in-law, proposed their daughters to him.  The KING OF PORTUGAL 
offered his daughter, CATHERINE OF BRAGANZA, and fifty thousand 
pounds:  in addition to which, the French King, who was favourable 
to that match, offered a loan of another fifty thousand.  The King 
of Spain, on the other hand, offered any one out of a dozen of 
Princesses, and other hopes of gain.  But the ready money carried 
the day, and Catherine came over in state to her merry marriage.

The whole Court was a great flaunting crowd of debauched men and 
shameless women; and Catherine's merry husband insulted and 
outraged her in every possible way, until she consented to receive 
those worthless creatures as her very good friends, and to degrade 
herself by their companionship.  A MRS. PALMER, whom the King made 
LADY CASTLEMAINE, and afterwards DUCHESS OF CLEVELAND, was one of 
the most powerful of the bad women about the Court, and had great 
influence with the King nearly all through his reign.  Another 
merry lady named MOLL DAVIES, a dancer at the theatre, was 
afterwards her rival.  So was NELL GWYN, first an orange girl and 
then an actress, who really had good in her, and of whom one of the 
worst things I know is, that actually she does seem to have been 
fond of the King.  The first DUKE OF ST. ALBANS was this orange 
girl's child.  In like manner the son of a merry waiting-lady, whom 
the King created DUCHESS OF PORTSMOUTH, became the DUKE OF 
RICHMOND.  Upon the whole it is not so bad a thing to be a 
commoner.

The Merry Monarch was so exceedingly merry among these merry 
ladies, and some equally merry (and equally infamous) lords and 
gentlemen, that he soon got through his hundred thousand pounds, 
and then, by way of raising a little pocket-money, made a merry 
bargain.  He sold Dunkirk to the French King for five millions of 
livres.  When I think of the dignity to which Oliver Cromwell 
raised England in the eyes of foreign powers, and when I think of 
the manner in which he gained for England this very Dunkirk, I am 
much inclined to consider that if the Merry Monarch had been made 
to follow his father for this action, he would have received his 
just deserts.

Though he was like his father in none of that father's greater 
qualities, he was like him in being worthy of no trust.  When he 
sent that letter to the Parliament, from Breda, he did expressly 
promise that all sincere religious opinions should be respected.  
Yet he was no sooner firm in his power than he consented to one of 
the worst Acts of Parliament ever passed.  Under this law, every 
minister who should not give his solemn assent to the Prayer-Book 
by a certain day, was declared to be a minister no longer, and to 
be deprived of his church.  The consequence of this was that some 
two thousand honest men were taken from their congregations, and 
reduced to dire poverty and distress.  It was followed by another 
outrageous law, called the Conventicle Act, by which any person 
above the age of sixteen who was present at any religious service 
not according to the Prayer-Book, was to be imprisoned three months 
for the first offence, six for the second, and to be transported 
for the third.  This Act alone filled the prisons, which were then 
most dreadful dungeons, to overflowing.

The Covenanters in Scotland had already fared no better.  A base 
Parliament, usually known as the Drunken Parliament, in consequence 
of its principal members being seldom sober, had been got together 
to make laws against the Covenanters, and to force all men to be of 
one mind in religious matters.  The MARQUIS OF ARGYLE, relying on 
the King's honour, had given himself up to him; but, he was 
wealthy, and his enemies wanted his wealth.  He was tried for 
treason, on the evidence of some private letters in which he had 
expressed opinions - as well he might - more favourable to the 
government of the late Lord Protector than of the present merry and 
religious King.  He was executed, as were two men of mark among the 
Covenanters; and SHARP, a traitor who had once been the friend of 
the Presbyterians and betrayed them, was made Archbishop of St. 
Andrew's, to teach the Scotch how to like bishops.

Things being in this merry state at home, the Merry Monarch 
undertook a war with the Dutch; principally because they interfered 
with an African company, established with the two objects of buying 
gold-dust and slaves, of which the Duke of York was a leading 
member.  After some preliminary hostilities, the said Duke sailed 
to the coast of Holland with a fleet of ninety-eight vessels of 
war, and four fire-ships.  This engaged with the Dutch fleet, of no 
fewer than one hundred and thirteen ships.  In the great battle 
between the two forces, the Dutch lost eighteen ships, four 
admirals, and seven thousand men.  But, the English on shore were 
in no mood of exultation when they heard the news.

For, this was the year and the time of the Great Plague in London.  
During the winter of one thousand six hundred and sixty-four it had 
been whispered about, that some few people had died here and there 
of the disease called the Plague, in some of the unwholesome 
suburbs around London.  News was not published at that time as it 
is now, and some people believed these rumours, and some 
disbelieved them, and they were soon forgotten.  But, in the month 
of May, one thousand six hundred and sixty-five, it began to be 
said all over the town that the disease had burst out with great 
violence in St. Giles's, and that the people were dying in great 
numbers.  This soon turned out to be awfully true.  The roads out 
of London were choked up by people endeavouring to escape from the 
infected city, and large sums were paid for any kind of conveyance.  
The disease soon spread so fast, that it was necessary to shut up 
the houses in which sick people were, and to cut them off from 
communication with the living.  Every one of these houses was 
marked on the outside of the door with a red cross, and the words, 
Lord, have mercy upon us!  The streets were all deserted, grass 
grew in the public ways, and there was a dreadful silence in the 
air.  When night came on, dismal rumblings used to be heard, and 
these were the wheels of the death-carts, attended by men with 
veiled faces and holding cloths to their mouths, who rang doleful 
bells and cried in a loud and solemn voice, 'Bring out your dead!'  
The corpses put into these carts were buried by torchlight in great 
pits; no service being performed over them; all men being afraid to 
stay for a moment on the brink of the ghastly graves.  In the 
general fear, children ran away from their parents, and parents 
from their children.  Some who were taken ill, died alone, and 
without any help.  Some were stabbed or strangled by hired nurses 
who robbed them of all their money, and stole the very beds on 
which they lay.  Some went mad, dropped from the windows, ran 
through the streets, and in their pain and frenzy flung themselves 
into the river.

These were not all the horrors of the time.  The wicked and 
dissolute, in wild desperation, sat in the taverns singing roaring 
songs, and were stricken as they drank, and went out and died.  The 
fearful and superstitious persuaded themselves that they saw 
supernatural sights - burning swords in the sky, gigantic arms and 
darts.  Others pretended that at nights vast crowds of ghosts 
walked round and round the dismal pits.  One madman, naked, and 
carrying a brazier full of burning coals upon his head, stalked 
through the streets, crying out that he was a Prophet, commissioned 
to denounce the vengeance of the Lord on wicked London.  Another 
always went to and fro, exclaiming, 'Yet forty days, and London 
shall be destroyed!'  A third awoke the echoes in the dismal 
streets, by night and by day, and made the blood of the sick run 
cold, by calling out incessantly, in a deep hoarse voice, 'O, the 
great and dreadful God!'

Through the months of July and August and September, the Great 
Plague raged more and more.  Great fires were lighted in the 
streets, in the hope of stopping the infection; but there was a 
plague of rain too, and it beat the fires out.  At last, the winds 
which usually arise at that time of the year which is called the 
equinox, when day and night are of equal length all over the world, 
began to blow, and to purify the wretched town.  The deaths began 
to decrease, the red crosses slowly to disappear, the fugitives to 
return, the shops to open, pale frightened faces to be seen in the 
streets.  The Plague had been in every part of England, but in 
close and unwholesome London it had killed one hundred thousand 
people.

All this time, the Merry Monarch was as merry as ever, and as 
worthless as ever.  All this time, the debauched lords and 
gentlemen and the shameless ladies danced and gamed and drank, and 
loved and hated one another, according to their merry ways.

So little humanity did the government learn from the late 
affliction, that one of the first things the Parliament did when it 
met at Oxford (being as yet afraid to come to London), was to make 
a law, called the Five Mile Act, expressly directed against those 
poor ministers who, in the time of the Plague, had manfully come 
back to comfort the unhappy people.  This infamous law, by 
forbidding them to teach in any school, or to come within five 
miles of any city, town, or village, doomed them to starvation and 
death.

The fleet had been at sea, and healthy.  The King of France was now 
in alliance with the Dutch, though his navy was chiefly employed in 
looking on while the English and Dutch fought.  The Dutch gained 
one victory; and the English gained another and a greater; and 
Prince Rupert, one of the English admirals, was out in the Channel 
one windy night, looking for the French Admiral, with the intention 
of giving him something more to do than he had had yet, when the 
gale increased to a storm, and blew him into Saint Helen's.  That 
night was the third of September, one thousand six hundred and 
sixty-six, and that wind fanned the Great Fire of London.

It broke out at a baker's shop near London Bridge, on the spot on 
which the Monument now stands as a remembrance of those raging 
flames.  It spread and spread, and burned and burned, for three 
days.  The nights were lighter than the days; in the daytime there 
was an immense cloud of smoke, and in the night-time there was a 
great tower of fire mounting up into the sky, which lighted the 
whole country landscape for ten miles round.  Showers of hot ashes 
rose into the air and fell on distant places; flying sparks carried 
the conflagration to great distances, and kindled it in twenty new 
spots at a time; church steeples fell down with tremendous crashes; 
houses crumbled into cinders by the hundred and the thousand.  The 
summer had been intensely hot and dry, the streets were very 
narrow, and the houses mostly built of wood and plaster.  Nothing 
could stop the tremendous fire, but the want of more houses to 
burn; nor did it stop until the whole way from the Tower to Temple 
Bar was a desert, composed of the ashes of thirteen thousand houses 
and eighty-nine churches.

This was a terrible visitation at the time, and occasioned great 
loss and suffering to the two hundred thousand burnt-out people, 
who were obliged to lie in the fields under the open night sky, or 
in hastily-made huts of mud and straw, while the lanes and roads 
were rendered impassable by carts which had broken down as they 
tried to save their goods.  But the Fire was a great blessing to 
the City afterwards, for it arose from its ruins very much improved 
- built more regularly, more widely, more cleanly and carefully, 
and therefore much more healthily.  It might be far more healthy 
than it is, but there are some people in it still - even now, at 
this time, nearly two hundred years later - so selfish, so pig-
headed, and so ignorant, that I doubt if even another Great Fire 
would warm them up to do their duty.

The Catholics were accused of having wilfully set London in flames; 
one poor Frenchman, who had been mad for years, even accused 
himself of having with his own hand fired the first house.  There 
is no reasonable doubt, however, that the fire was accidental.  An 
inscription on the Monument long attributed it to the Catholics; 
but it is removed now, and was always a malicious and stupid 
untruth.


SECOND PART


THAT the Merry Monarch might be very merry indeed, in the merry 
times when his people were suffering under pestilence and fire, he 
drank and gambled and flung away among his favourites the money 
which the Parliament had voted for the war.  The consequence of 
this was that the stout-hearted English sailors were merrily 
starving of want, and dying in the streets; while the Dutch, under 
their admirals DE WITT and DE RUYTER, came into the River Thames, 
and up the River Medway as far as Upnor, burned the guard-ships, 
silenced the weak batteries, and did what they would to the English 
coast for six whole weeks.  Most of the English ships that could 
have prevented them had neither powder nor shot on board; in this 
merry reign, public officers made themselves as merry as the King 
did with the public money; and when it was entrusted to them to 
spend in national defences or preparations, they put it into their 
own pockets with the merriest grace in the world.

Lord Clarendon had, by this time, run as long a course as is 
usually allotted to the unscrupulous ministers of bad kings.  He 
was impeached by his political opponents, but unsuccessfully.  The 
King then commanded him to withdraw from England and retire to 
France, which he did, after defending himself in writing.  He was 
no great loss at home, and died abroad some seven years afterwards.

There then came into power a ministry called the Cabal Ministry, 
because it was composed of LORD CLIFFORD, the EARL OF ARLINGTON, 
the DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM (a great rascal, and the King's most 
powerful favourite), LORD ASHLEY, and the DUKE OF LAUDERDALE, C. A. 
B. A. L.  As the French were making conquests in Flanders, the 
first Cabal proceeding was to make a treaty with the Dutch, for 
uniting with Spain to oppose the French.  It was no sooner made 
than the Merry Monarch, who always wanted to get money without 
being accountable to a Parliament for his expenditure, apologised 
to the King of France for having had anything to do with it, and 
concluded a secret treaty with him, making himself his infamous 
pensioner to the amount of two millions of livres down, and three 
millions more a year; and engaging to desert that very Spain, to 
make war against those very Dutch, and to declare himself a 
Catholic when a convenient time should arrive.  This religious king 
had lately been crying to his Catholic brother on the subject of 
his strong desire to be a Catholic; and now he merrily concluded 
this treasonable conspiracy against the country he governed, by 
undertaking to become one as soon as he safely could.  For all of 
which, though he had had ten merry heads instead of one, he richly 
deserved to lose them by the headsman's axe.

As his one merry head might have been far from safe, if these 
things had been known, they were kept very quiet, and war was 
declared by France and England against the Dutch.  But, a very 
uncommon man, afterwards most important to English history and to 
the religion and liberty of this land, arose among them, and for 
many long years defeated the whole projects of France.  This was 
WILLIAM OF NASSAU, PRINCE OF ORANGE, son of the last Prince of 
Orange of the same name, who married the daughter of Charles the 
First of England.  He was a young man at this time, only just of 
age; but he was brave, cool, intrepid, and wise.  His father had 
been so detested that, upon his death, the Dutch had abolished the 
authority to which this son would have otherwise succeeded 
(Stadtholder it was called), and placed the chief power in the 
hands of JOHN DE WITT, who educated this young prince.  Now, the 
Prince became very popular, and John de Witt's brother CORNELIUS 
was sentenced to banishment on a false accusation of conspiring to 
kill him.  John went to the prison where he was, to take him away 
to exile, in his coach; and a great mob who collected on the 
occasion, then and there cruelly murdered both the brothers.  This 
left the government in the hands of the Prince, who was really the 
choice of the nation; and from this time he exercised it with the 
greatest vigour, against the whole power of France, under its 
famous generals CONDE and TURENNE, and in support of the Protestant 
religion.  It was full seven years before this war ended in a 
treaty of peace made at Nimeguen, and its details would occupy a 
very considerable space.  It is enough to say that William of 
Orange established a famous character with the whole world; and 
that the Merry Monarch, adding to and improving on his former 
baseness, bound himself to do everything the King of France liked, 
and nothing the King of France did not like, for a pension of one 
hundred thousand pounds a year, which was afterwards doubled.  
Besides this, the King of France, by means of his corrupt 
ambassador - who wrote accounts of his proceedings in England, 
which are not always to be believed, I think - bought our English 
members of Parliament, as he wanted them.  So, in point of fact, 
during a considerable portion of this merry reign, the King of 
France was the real King of this country.

But there was a better time to come, and it was to come (though his 
royal uncle little thought so) through that very William, Prince of 
Orange.  He came over to England, saw Mary, the elder daughter of 
the Duke of York, and married her.  We shall see by-and-by what 
came of that marriage, and why it is never to be forgotten.

This daughter was a Protestant, but her mother died a Catholic.  
She and her sister ANNE, also a Protestant, were the only survivors 
of eight children.  Anne afterwards married GEORGE, PRINCE OF 
DENMARK, brother to the King of that country.

Lest you should do the Merry Monarch the injustice of supposing 
that he was even good humoured (except when he had everything his 
own way), or that he was high spirited and honourable, I will 
mention here what was done to a member of the House of Commons, SIR 
JOHN COVENTRY.  He made a remark in a debate about taxing the 
theatres, which gave the King offence.  The King agreed with his 
illegitimate son, who had been born abroad, and whom he had made 
DUKE OF MONMOUTH, to take the following merry vengeance.  To waylay 
him at night, fifteen armed men to one, and to slit his nose with a 
penknife.  Like master, like man.  The King's favourite, the Duke 
of Buckingham, was strongly suspected of setting on an assassin to 
murder the DUKE OF ORMOND as he was returning home from a dinner; 
and that Duke's spirited son, LORD OSSORY, was so persuaded of his 
guilt, that he said to him at Court, even as he stood beside the 
King, 'My lord, I know very well that you are at the bottom of this 
late attempt upon my father.  But I give you warning, if he ever 
come to a violent end, his blood shall be upon you, and wherever I 
meet you I will pistol you!  I will do so, though I find you 
standing behind the King's chair; and I tell you this in his 
Majesty's presence, that you may be quite sure of my doing what I 
threaten.'  Those were merry times indeed.

There was a fellow named BLOOD, who was seized for making, with two 
companions, an audacious attempt to steal the crown, the globe, and 
sceptre, from the place where the jewels were kept in the Tower.  
This robber, who was a swaggering ruffian, being taken, declared 
that he was the man who had endeavoured to kill the Duke of Ormond, 
and that he had meant to kill the King too, but was overawed by the 
majesty of his appearance, when he might otherwise have done it, as 
he was bathing at Battersea.  The King being but an ill-looking 
fellow, I don't believe a word of this.  Whether he was flattered, 
or whether he knew that Buckingham had really set Blood on to 
murder the Duke, is uncertain.  But it is quite certain that he 
pardoned this thief, gave him an estate of five hundred a year in 
Ireland (which had had the honour of giving him birth), and 
presented him at Court to the debauched lords and the shameless 
ladies, who made a great deal of him - as I have no doubt they 
would have made of the Devil himself, if the King had introduced 
him.

Infamously pensioned as he was, the King still wanted money, and 
consequently was obliged to call Parliaments.  In these, the great 
object of the Protestants was to thwart the Catholic Duke of York, 
who married a second time; his new wife being a young lady only 
fifteen years old, the Catholic sister of the DUKE OF MODENA.  In 
this they were seconded by the Protestant Dissenters, though to 
their own disadvantage:  since, to exclude Catholics from power, 
they were even willing to exclude themselves.  The King's object 
was to pretend to be a Protestant, while he was really a Catholic; 
to swear to the bishops that he was devoutly attached to the 
English Church, while he knew he had bargained it away to the King 
of France; and by cheating and deceiving them, and all who were 
attached to royalty, to become despotic and be powerful enough to 
confess what a rascal he was.  Meantime, the King of France, 
knowing his merry pensioner well, intrigued with the King's 
opponents in Parliament, as well as with the King and his friends.

The fears that the country had of the Catholic religion being 
restored, if the Duke of York should come to the throne, and the 
low cunning of the King in pretending to share their alarms, led to 
some very terrible results.  A certain DR. TONGE, a dull clergyman 
in the City, fell into the hands of a certain TITUS OATES, a most 
infamous character, who pretended to have acquired among the 
Jesuits abroad a knowledge of a great plot for the murder of the 
King, and the re-establishment if the Catholic religion.  Titus 
Oates, being produced by this unlucky Dr. Tonge and solemnly 
examined before the council, contradicted himself in a thousand 
ways, told the most ridiculous and improbable stories, and 
implicated COLEMAN, the Secretary of the Duchess of York.  Now, 
although what he charged against Coleman was not true, and although 
you and I know very well that the real dangerous Catholic plot was 
that one with the King of France of which the Merry Monarch was 
himself the head, there happened to be found among Coleman's 
papers, some letters, in which he did praise the days of Bloody 
Queen Mary, and abuse the Protestant religion.  This was great good 
fortune for Titus, as it seemed to confirm him; but better still 
was in store.  SIR EDMUNDBURY GODFREY, the magistrate who had first 
examined him, being unexpectedly found dead near Primrose Hill, was 
confidently believed to have been killed by the Catholics.  I think 
there is no doubt that he had been melancholy mad, and that he 
killed himself; but he had a great Protestant funeral, and Titus 
was called the Saver of the Nation, and received a pension of 
twelve hundred pounds a year.

As soon as Oates's wickedness had met with this success, up started 
another villain, named WILLIAM BEDLOE, who, attracted by a reward 
of five hundred pounds offered for the apprehension of the 
murderers of Godfrey, came forward and charged two Jesuits and some 
other persons with having committed it at the Queen's desire.  
Oates, going into partnership with this new informer, had the 
audacity to accuse the poor Queen herself of high treason.  Then 
appeared a third informer, as bad as either of the two, and accused 
a Catholic banker named STAYLEY of having said that the King was 
the greatest rogue in the world (which would not have been far from 
the truth), and that he would kill him with his own hand.  This 
banker, being at once tried and executed, Coleman and two others 
were tried and executed.  Then, a miserable wretch named PRANCE, a 
Catholic silversmith, being accused by Bedloe, was tortured into 
confessing that he had taken part in Godfrey's murder, and into 
accusing three other men of having committed it.  Then, five 
Jesuits were accused by Oates, Bedloe, and Prance together, and 
were all found guilty, and executed on the same kind of 
contradictory and absurd evidence.  The Queen's physician and three 
monks were next put on their trial; but Oates and Bedloe had for 
the time gone far enough and these four were acquitted.  The public 
mind, however, was so full of a Catholic plot, and so strong 
against the Duke of York, that James consented to obey a written 
order from his brother, and to go with his family to Brussels, 
provided that his rights should never be sacrificed in his absence 
to the Duke of Monmouth.  The House of Commons, not satisfied with 
this as the King hoped, passed a bill to exclude the Duke from ever 
succeeding to the throne.  In return, the King dissolved the 
Parliament.  He had deserted his old favourite, the Duke of 
Buckingham, who was now in the opposition.

To give any sufficient idea of the miseries of Scotland in this 
merry reign, would occupy a hundred pages.  Because the people 
would not have bishops, and were resolved to stand by their solemn 
League and Covenant, such cruelties were inflicted upon them as 
make the blood run cold.  Ferocious dragoons galloped through the 
country to punish the peasants for deserting the churches; sons 
were hanged up at their fathers' doors for refusing to disclose 
where their fathers were concealed; wives were tortured to death 
for not betraying their husbands; people were taken out of their 
fields and gardens, and shot on the public roads without trial; 
lighted matches were tied to the fingers of prisoners, and a most 
horrible torment called the Boot was invented, and constantly 
applied, which ground and mashed the victims' legs with iron 
wedges.  Witnesses were tortured as well as prisoners.  All the 
prisons were full; all the gibbets were heavy with bodies; murder 
and plunder devastated the whole country.  In spite of all, the 
Covenanters were by no means to be dragged into the churches, and 
persisted in worshipping God as they thought right.  A body of 
ferocious Highlanders, turned upon them from the mountains of their 
own country, had no greater effect than the English dragoons under 
GRAHAME OF CLAVERHOUSE, the most cruel and rapacious of all their 
enemies, whose name will ever be cursed through the length and 
breadth of Scotland.  Archbishop Sharp had ever aided and abetted 
all these outrages.  But he fell at last; for, when the injuries of 
the Scottish people were at their height, he was seen, in his 
coach-and-six coming across a moor, by a body of men, headed by one 
JOHN BALFOUR, who were waiting for another of their oppressors.  
Upon this they cried out that Heaven had delivered him into their 
hands, and killed him with many wounds.  If ever a man deserved 
such a death, I think Archbishop Sharp did.

It made a great noise directly, and the Merry Monarch - strongly 
suspected of having goaded the Scottish people on, that he might 
have an excuse for a greater army than the Parliament were willing 
to give him - sent down his son, the Duke of Monmouth, as 
commander-in-chief, with instructions to attack the Scottish 
rebels, or Whigs as they were called, whenever he came up with 
them.  Marching with ten thousand men from Edinburgh, he found 
them, in number four or five thousand, drawn up at Bothwell Bridge, 
by the Clyde.  They were soon dispersed; and Monmouth showed a more 
humane character towards them, than he had shown towards that 
Member of Parliament whose nose he had caused to be slit with a 
penknife.  But the Duke of Lauderdale was their bitter foe, and 
sent Claverhouse to finish them.

As the Duke of York became more and more unpopular, the Duke of 
Monmouth became more and more popular.  It would have been decent 
in the latter not to have voted in favour of the renewed bill for 
the exclusion of James from the throne; but he did so, much to the 
King's amusement, who used to sit in the House of Lords by the 
fire, hearing the debates, which he said were as good as a play.  
The House of Commons passed the bill by a large majority, and it 
was carried up to the House of Lords by LORD RUSSELL, one of the 
best of the leaders on the Protestant side.  It was rejected there, 
chiefly because the bishops helped the King to get rid of it; and 
the fear of Catholic plots revived again.  There had been another 
got up, by a fellow out of Newgate, named DANGERFIELD, which is 
more famous than it deserves to be, under the name of the MEAL-TUB 
PLOT.  This jail-bird having been got out of Newgate by a MRS. 
CELLIER, a Catholic nurse, had turned Catholic himself, and 
pretended that he knew of a plot among the Presbyterians against 
the King's life.  This was very pleasant to the Duke of York, who 
hated the Presbyterians, who returned the compliment.  He gave 
Dangerfield twenty guineas, and sent him to the King his brother.  
But Dangerfield, breaking down altogether in his charge, and being 
sent back to Newgate, almost astonished the Duke out of his five 
senses by suddenly swearing that the Catholic nurse had put that 
false design into his head, and that what he really knew about, 
was, a Catholic plot against the King; the evidence of which would 
be found in some papers, concealed in a meal-tub in Mrs. Cellier's 
house.  There they were, of course - for he had put them there 
himself - and so the tub gave the name to the plot.  But, the nurse 
was acquitted on her trial, and it came to nothing.

Lord Ashley, of the Cabal, was now Lord Shaftesbury, and was strong 
against the succession of the Duke of York.  The House of Commons, 
aggravated to the utmost extent, as we may well suppose, by 
suspicions of the King's conspiracy with the King of France, made a 
desperate point of the exclusion, still, and were bitter against 
the Catholics generally.  So unjustly bitter were they, I grieve to 
say, that they impeached the venerable Lord Stafford, a Catholic 
nobleman seventy years old, of a design to kill the King.  The 
witnesses were that atrocious Oates and two other birds of the same 
feather.  He was found guilty, on evidence quite as foolish as it 
was false, and was beheaded on Tower Hill.  The people were opposed 
to him when he first appeared upon the scaffold; but, when he had 
addressed them and shown them how innocent he was and how wickedly 
he was sent there, their better nature was aroused, and they said, 
'We believe you, my Lord.  God bless you, my Lord!'

The House of Commons refused to let the King have any money until 
he should consent to the Exclusion Bill; but, as he could get it 
and did get it from his master the King of France, he could afford 
to hold them very cheap.  He called a Parliament at Oxford, to 
which he went down with a great show of being armed and protected 
as if he were in danger of his life, and to which the opposition 
members also went armed and protected, alleging that they were in 
fear of the Papists, who were numerous among the King's guards.  
However, they went on with the Exclusion Bill, and were so earnest 
upon it that they would have carried it again, if the King had not 
popped his crown and state robes into a sedan-chair, bundled 
himself into it along with them, hurried down to the chamber where 
the House of Lords met, and dissolved the Parliament.  After which 
he scampered home, and the members of Parliament scampered home 
too, as fast as their legs could carry them.

The Duke of York, then residing in Scotland, had, under the law 
which excluded Catholics from public trust, no right whatever to 
public employment.  Nevertheless, he was openly employed as the 
King's representative in Scotland, and there gratified his sullen 
and cruel nature to his heart's content by directing the dreadful 
cruelties against the Covenanters.  There were two ministers named 
CARGILL and CAMERON who had escaped from the battle of Bothwell 
Bridge, and who returned to Scotland, and raised the miserable but 
still brave and unsubdued Covenanters afresh, under the name of 
Cameronians.  As Cameron publicly posted a declaration that the 
King was a forsworn tyrant, no mercy was shown to his unhappy 
followers after he was slain in battle.  The Duke of York, who was 
particularly fond of the Boot and derived great pleasure from 
having it applied, offered their lives to some of these people, if 
they would cry on the scaffold 'God save the King!'  But their 
relations, friends, and countrymen, had been so barbarously 
tortured and murdered in this merry reign, that they preferred to 
die, and did die.  The Duke then obtained his merry brother's 
permission to hold a Parliament in Scotland, which first, with most 
shameless deceit, confirmed the laws for securing the Protestant 
religion against Popery, and then declared that nothing must or 
should prevent the succession of the Popish Duke.  After this 
double-faced beginning, it established an oath which no human being 
could understand, but which everybody was to take, as a proof that 
his religion was the lawful religion.  The Earl of Argyle, taking 
it with the explanation that he did not consider it to prevent him 
from favouring any alteration either in the Church or State which 
was not inconsistent with the Protestant religion or with his 
loyalty, was tried for high treason before a Scottish jury of which 
the MARQUIS OF MONTROSE was foreman, and was found guilty.  He 
escaped the scaffold, for that time, by getting away, in the 
disguise of a page, in the train of his daughter, LADY SOPHIA 
LINDSAY.  It was absolutely proposed, by certain members of the 
Scottish Council, that this lady should be whipped through the 
streets of Edinburgh.  But this was too much even for the Duke, who 
had the manliness then (he had very little at most times) to remark 
that Englishmen were not accustomed to treat ladies in that manner.  
In those merry times nothing could equal the brutal servility of 
the Scottish fawners, but the conduct of similar degraded beings in 
England.

After the settlement of these little affairs, the Duke returned to 
England, and soon resumed his place at the Council, and his office 
of High Admiral - all this by his brother's favour, and in open 
defiance of the law.  It would have been no loss to the country, if 
he had been drowned when his ship, in going to Scotland to fetch 
his family, struck on a sand-bank, and was lost with two hundred 
souls on board.  But he escaped in a boat with some friends; and 
the sailors were so brave and unselfish, that, when they saw him 
rowing away, they gave three cheers, while they themselves were 
going down for ever.

The Merry Monarch, having got rid of his Parliament, went to work 
to make himself despotic, with all speed.  Having had the villainy 
to order the execution of OLIVER PLUNKET, BISHOP OF ARMAGH, falsely 
accused of a plot to establish Popery in that country by means of a 
French army - the very thing this royal traitor was himself trying 
to do at home - and having tried to ruin Lord Shaftesbury, and 
failed - he turned his hand to controlling the corporations all 
over the country; because, if he could only do that, he could get 
what juries he chose, to bring in perjured verdicts, and could get 
what members he chose returned to Parliament.  These merry times 
produced, and made Chief Justice of the Court of King's Bench, a 
drunken ruffian of the name of JEFFREYS; a red-faced, swollen, 
bloated, horrible creature, with a bullying, roaring voice, and a 
more savage nature perhaps than was ever lodged in any human 
breast.  This monster was the Merry Monarch's especial favourite, 
and he testified his admiration of him by giving him a ring from 
his own finger, which the people used to call Judge Jeffreys's 
Bloodstone.  Him the King employed to go about and bully the 
corporations, beginning with London; or, as Jeffreys himself 
elegantly called it, 'to give them a lick with the rough side of 
his tongue.'  And he did it so thoroughly, that they soon became 
the basest and most sycophantic bodies in the kingdom - except the 
University of Oxford, which, in that respect, was quite pre-eminent 
and unapproachable.

Lord Shaftesbury (who died soon after the King's failure against 
him), LORD WILLIAM RUSSELL, the Duke of Monmouth, LORD HOWARD, LORD 
JERSEY, ALGERNON SIDNEY, JOHN HAMPDEN (grandson of the great 
Hampden), and some others, used to hold a council together after 
the dissolution of the Parliament, arranging what it might be 
necessary to do, if the King carried his Popish plot to the utmost 
height.  Lord Shaftesbury having been much the most violent of this 
party, brought two violent men into their secrets - RUMSEY, who had 
been a soldier in the Republican army; and WEST, a lawyer.  These 
two knew an old officer of CROMWELL'S, called RUMBOLD, who had 
married a maltster's widow, and so had come into possession of a 
solitary dwelling called the Rye House, near Hoddesdon, in 
Hertfordshire.  Rumbold said to them what a capital place this 
house of his would be from which to shoot at the King, who often 
passed there going to and fro from Newmarket.  They liked the idea, 
and entertained it.  But, one of their body gave information; and 
they, together with SHEPHERD a wine merchant, Lord Russell, 
Algernon Sidney, LORD ESSEX, LORD HOWARD, and Hampden, were all 
arrested.

Lord Russell might have easily escaped, but scorned to do so, being 
innocent of any wrong; Lord Essex might have easily escaped, but 
scorned to do so, lest his flight should prejudice Lord Russell.  
But it weighed upon his mind that he had brought into their 
council, Lord Howard - who now turned a miserable traitor - against 
a great dislike Lord Russell had always had of him.  He could not 
bear the reflection, and destroyed himself before Lord Russell was 
brought to trial at the Old Bailey.

He knew very well that he had nothing to hope, having always been 
manful in the Protestant cause against the two false brothers, the 
one on the throne, and the other standing next to it.  He had a 
wife, one of the noblest and best of women, who acted as his 
secretary on his trial, who comforted him in his prison, who supped 
with him on the night before he died, and whose love and virtue and 
devotion have made her name imperishable.  Of course, he was found 
guilty, and was sentenced to be beheaded in Lincoln's Inn-fields, 
not many yards from his own house.  When he had parted from his 
children on the evening before his death, his wife still stayed 
with him until ten o'clock at night; and when their final 
separation in this world was over, and he had kissed her many 
times, he still sat for a long while in his prison, talking of her 
goodness.  Hearing the rain fall fast at that time, he calmly said, 
'Such a rain to-morrow will spoil a great show, which is a dull 
thing on a rainy day.'  At midnight he went to bed, and slept till 
four; even when his servant called him, he fell asleep again while 
his clothes were being made ready.  He rode to the scaffold in his 
own carriage, attended by two famous clergymen, TILLOTSON and 
BURNET, and sang a psalm to himself very softly, as he went along.  
He was as quiet and as steady as if he had been going out for an 
ordinary ride.  After saying that he was surprised to see so great 
a crowd, he laid down his head upon the block, as if upon the 
pillow of his bed, and had it struck off at the second blow.  His 
noble wife was busy for him even then; for that true-hearted lady 
printed and widely circulated his last words, of which he had given 
her a copy.  They made the blood of all the honest men in England 
boil.

The University of Oxford distinguished itself on the very same day 
by pretending to believe that the accusation against Lord Russell 
was true, and by calling the King, in a written paper, the Breath 
of their Nostrils and the Anointed of the Lord.  This paper the 
Parliament afterwards caused to be burned by the common hangman; 
which I am sorry for, as I wish it had been framed and glazed and 
hung up in some public place, as a monument of baseness for the 
scorn of mankind.

Next, came the trial of Algernon Sidney, at which Jeffreys 
presided, like a great crimson toad, sweltering and swelling with 
rage.  'I pray God, Mr. Sidney,' said this Chief Justice of a merry 
reign, after passing sentence, 'to work in you a temper fit to go 
to the other world, for I see you are not fit for this.'  'My 
lord,' said the prisoner, composedly holding out his arm, 'feel my 
pulse, and see if I be disordered.  I thank Heaven I never was in 
better temper than I am now.'  Algernon Sidney was executed on 
Tower Hill, on the seventh of December, one thousand six hundred 
and eighty-three.  He died a hero, and died, in his own words, 'For 
that good old cause in which he had been engaged from his youth, 
and for which God had so often and so wonderfully declared 
himself.'

The Duke of Monmouth had been making his uncle, the Duke of York, 
very jealous, by going about the country in a royal sort of way, 
playing at the people's games, becoming godfather to their 
children, and even touching for the King's evil, or stroking the 
faces of the sick to cure them - though, for the matter of that, I 
should say he did them about as much good as any crowned king could 
have done.  His father had got him to write a letter, confessing 
his having had a part in the conspiracy, for which Lord Russell had 
been beheaded; but he was ever a weak man, and as soon as he had 
written it, he was ashamed of it and got it back again.  For this, 
he was banished to the Netherlands; but he soon returned and had an 
interview with his father, unknown to his uncle.  It would seem 
that he was coming into the Merry Monarch's favour again, and that 
the Duke of York was sliding out of it, when Death appeared to the 
merry galleries at Whitehall, and astonished the debauched lords 
and gentlemen, and the shameless ladies, very considerably.

On Monday, the second of February, one thousand six hundred and 
eighty-five, the merry pensioner and servant of the King of France 
fell down in a fit of apoplexy.  By the Wednesday his case was 
hopeless, and on the Thursday he was told so.  As he made a 
difficulty about taking the sacrament from the Protestant Bishop of 
Bath, the Duke of York got all who were present away from the bed, 
and asked his brother, in a whisper, if he should send for a 
Catholic priest?   The King replied, 'For God's sake, brother, do!'  
The Duke smuggled in, up the back stairs, disguised in a wig and 
gown, a priest named HUDDLESTON, who had saved the King's life 
after the battle of Worcester:  telling him that this worthy man in 
the wig had once saved his body, and was now come to save his soul.

The Merry Monarch lived through that night, and died before noon on 
the next day, which was Friday, the sixth.  Two of the last things 
he said were of a human sort, and your remembrance will give him 
the full benefit of them.  When the Queen sent to say she was too 
unwell to attend him and to ask his pardon, he said, 'Alas! poor 
woman, SHE beg MY pardon!  I beg hers with all my heart.  Take back 
that answer to her.'  And he also said, in reference to Nell Gwyn, 
'Do not let poor Nelly starve.'

He died in the fifty-fifth year of his age, and the twenty-fifth of 
his reign.



CHAPTER XXXVI - ENGLAND UNDER JAMES THE SECOND



KING JAMES THE SECOND was a man so very disagreeable, that even the 
best of historians has favoured his brother Charles, as becoming, 
by comparison, quite a pleasant character.  The one object of his 
short reign was to re-establish the Catholic religion in England; 
and this he doggedly pursued with such a stupid obstinacy, that his 
career very soon came to a close.

The first thing he did, was, to assure his council that he would 
make it his endeavour to preserve the Government, both in Church 
and State, as it was by law established; and that he would always 
take care to defend and support the Church.  Great public 
acclamations were raised over this fair speech, and a great deal 
was said, from the pulpits and elsewhere, about the word of a King 
which was never broken, by credulous people who little supposed 
that he had formed a secret council for Catholic affairs, of which 
a mischievous Jesuit, called FATHER PETRE, was one of the chief 
members.  With tears of joy in his eyes, he received, as the 
beginning of HIS pension from the King of France, five hundred 
thousand livres; yet, with a mixture of meanness and arrogance that 
belonged to his contemptible character, he was always jealous of 
making some show of being independent of the King of France, while 
he pocketed his money.  As - notwithstanding his publishing two 
papers in favour of Popery (and not likely to do it much service, I 
should think) written by the King, his brother, and found in his 
strong-box; and his open display of himself attending mass - the 
Parliament was very obsequious, and granted him a large sum of 
money, he began his reign with a belief that he could do what he 
pleased, and with a determination to do it.

Before we proceed to its principal events, let us dispose of Titus 
Oates.  He was tried for perjury, a fortnight after the coronation, 
and besides being very heavily fined, was sentenced to stand twice 
in the pillory, to be whipped from Aldgate to Newgate one day, and 
from Newgate to Tyburn two days afterwards, and to stand in the 
pillory five times a year as long as he lived.  This fearful 
sentence was actually inflicted on the rascal.  Being unable to 
stand after his first flogging, he was dragged on a sledge from 
Newgate to Tyburn, and flogged as he was drawn along.  He was so 
strong a villain that he did not die under the torture, but lived 
to be afterwards pardoned and rewarded, though not to be ever 
believed in any more.  Dangerfield, the only other one of that crew 
left alive, was not so fortunate.  He was almost killed by a 
whipping from Newgate to Tyburn, and, as if that were not 
punishment enough, a ferocious barrister of Gray's Inn gave him a 
poke in the eye with his cane, which caused his death; for which 
the ferocious barrister was deservedly tried and executed.

As soon as James was on the throne, Argyle and Monmouth went from 
Brussels to Rotterdam, and attended a meeting of Scottish exiles 
held there, to concert measures for a rising in England.  It was 
agreed that Argyle should effect a landing in Scotland, and 
Monmouth in England; and that two Englishmen should be sent with 
Argyle to be in his confidence, and two Scotchmen with the Duke of 
Monmouth.

Argyle was the first to act upon this contract.  But, two of his 
men being taken prisoners at the Orkney Islands, the Government 
became aware of his intention, and was able to act against him with 
such vigour as to prevent his raising more than two or three 
thousand Highlanders, although he sent a fiery cross, by trusty 
messengers, from clan to clan and from glen to glen, as the custom 
then was when those wild people were to be excited by their chiefs.  
As he was moving towards Glasgow with his small force, he was 
betrayed by some of his followers, taken, and carried, with his 
hands tied behind his back, to his old prison in Edinburgh Castle.  
James ordered him to be executed, on his old shamefully unjust 
sentence, within three days; and he appears to have been anxious 
that his legs should have been pounded with his old favourite the 
boot.  However, the boot was not applied; he was simply beheaded, 
and his head was set upon the top of Edinburgh Jail.  One of those 
Englishmen who had been assigned to him was that old soldier 
Rumbold, the master of the Rye House.  He was sorely wounded, and 
within a week after Argyle had suffered with great courage, was 
brought up for trial, lest he should die and disappoint the King.  
He, too, was executed, after defending himself with great spirit, 
and saying that he did not believe that God had made the greater 
part of mankind to carry saddles on their backs and bridles in 
their mouths, and to be ridden by a few, booted and spurred for the 
purpose - in which I thoroughly agree with Rumbold.

The Duke of Monmouth, partly through being detained and partly 
through idling his time away, was five or six weeks behind his 
friend when he landed at Lyme, in Dorset:  having at his right hand 
an unlucky nobleman called LORD GREY OF WERK, who of himself would 
have ruined a far more promising expedition.  He immediately set up 
his standard in the market-place, and proclaimed the King a tyrant, 
and a Popish usurper, and I know not what else; charging him, not 
only with what he had done, which was bad enough, but with what 
neither he nor anybody else had done, such as setting fire to 
London, and poisoning the late King.  Raising some four thousand 
men by these means, he marched on to Taunton, where there were many 
Protestant dissenters who were strongly opposed to the Catholics.  
Here, both the rich and poor turned out to receive him, ladies 
waved a welcome to him from all the windows as he passed along the 
streets, flowers were strewn in his way, and every compliment and 
honour that could be devised was showered upon him.  Among the 
rest, twenty young ladies came forward, in their best clothes, and 
in their brightest beauty, and gave him a Bible ornamented with 
their own fair hands, together with other presents.

Encouraged by this homage, he proclaimed himself King, and went on 
to Bridgewater.  But, here the Government troops, under the EARL OF 
FEVERSHAM, were close at hand; and he was so dispirited at finding 
that he made but few powerful friends after all, that it was a 
question whether he should disband his army and endeavour to 
escape.  It was resolved, at the instance of that unlucky Lord 
Grey, to make a night attack on the King's army, as it lay encamped 
on the edge of a morass called Sedgemoor.  The horsemen were 
commanded by the same unlucky lord, who was not a brave man.  He 
gave up the battle almost at the first obstacle - which was a deep 
drain; and although the poor countrymen, who had turned out for 
Monmouth, fought bravely with scythes, poles, pitchforks, and such 
poor weapons as they had, they were soon dispersed by the trained 
soldiers, and fled in all directions.  When the Duke of Monmouth 
himself fled, was not known in the confusion; but the unlucky Lord 
Grey was taken early next day, and then another of the party was 
taken, who confessed that he had parted from the Duke only four 
hours before.  Strict search being made, he was found disguised as 
a peasant, hidden in a ditch under fern and nettles, with a few 
peas in his pocket which he had gathered in the fields to eat.  The 
only other articles he had upon him were a few papers and little 
books:  one of the latter being a strange jumble, in his own 
writing, of charms, songs, recipes, and prayers.  He was completely 
broken.  He wrote a miserable letter to the King, beseeching and 
entreating to be allowed to see him.  When he was taken to London, 
and conveyed bound into the King's presence, he crawled to him on 
his knees, and made a most degrading exhibition.  As James never 
forgave or relented towards anybody, he was not likely to soften 
towards the issuer of the Lyme proclamation, so he told the 
suppliant to prepare for death.

On the fifteenth of July, one thousand six hundred and eighty-five, 
this unfortunate favourite of the people was brought out to die on 
Tower Hill.  The crowd was immense, and the tops of all the houses 
were covered with gazers.  He had seen his wife, the daughter of 
the Duke of Buccleuch, in the Tower, and had talked much of a lady 
whom he loved far better - the LADY HARRIET WENTWORTH - who was one 
of the last persons he remembered in this life.  Before laying down 
his head upon the block he felt the edge of the axe, and told the 
executioner that he feared it was not sharp enough, and that the 
axe was not heavy enough.  On the executioner replying that it was 
of the proper kind, the Duke said, 'I pray you have a care, and do 
not use me so awkwardly as you used my Lord Russell.'  The 
executioner, made nervous by this, and trembling, struck once and 
merely gashed him in the neck.  Upon this, the Duke of Monmouth 
raised his head and looked the man reproachfully in the face.  Then 
he struck twice, and then thrice, and then threw down the axe, and 
cried out in a voice of horror that he could not finish that work.  
The sheriffs, however, threatening him with what should be done to 
himself if he did not, he took it up again and struck a fourth time 
and a fifth time.  Then the wretched head at last fell off, and 
James, Duke of Monmouth, was dead, in the thirty-sixth year of his 
age.  He was a showy, graceful man, with many popular qualities, 
and had found much favour in the open hearts of the English.

The atrocities, committed by the Government, which followed this 
Monmouth rebellion, form the blackest and most lamentable page in 
English history.  The poor peasants, having been dispersed with 
great loss, and their leaders having been taken, one would think 
that the implacable King might have been satisfied.  But no; he let 
loose upon them, among other intolerable monsters, a COLONEL KIRK, 
who had served against the Moors, and whose soldiers - called by 
the people Kirk's lambs, because they bore a lamb upon their flag, 
as the emblem of Christianity - were worthy of their leader.  The 
atrocities committed by these demons in human shape are far too 
horrible to be related here.  It is enough to say, that besides 
most ruthlessly murdering and robbing them, and ruining them by 
making them buy their pardons at the price of all they possessed, 
it was one of Kirk's favourite amusements, as he and his officers 
sat drinking after dinner, and toasting the King, to have batches 
of prisoners hanged outside the windows for the company's 
diversion; and that when their feet quivered in the convulsions of 
death, he used to swear that they should have music to their 
dancing, and would order the drums to beat and the trumpets to 
play.  The detestable King informed him, as an acknowledgment of 
these services, that he was 'very well satisfied with his 
proceedings.'  But the King's great delight was in the proceedings 
of Jeffreys, now a peer, who went down into the west, with four 
other judges, to try persons accused of having had any share in the 
rebellion.  The King pleasantly called this 'Jeffreys's campaign.'  
The people down in that part of the country remember it to this day 
as The Bloody Assize.

It began at Winchester, where a poor deaf old lady, MRS. ALICIA 
LISLE, the widow of one of the judges of Charles the First (who had 
been murdered abroad by some Royalist assassins), was charged with 
having given shelter in her house to two fugitives from Sedgemoor.  
Three times the jury refused to find her guilty, until Jeffreys 
bullied and frightened them into that false verdict.  When he had 
extorted it from them, he said, 'Gentlemen, if I had been one of 
you, and she had been my own mother, I would have found her 
guilty;' - as I dare say he would.  He sentenced her to be burned 
alive, that very afternoon.  The clergy of the cathedral and some 
others interfered in her favour, and she was beheaded within a 
week.  As a high mark of his approbation, the King made Jeffreys 
Lord Chancellor; and he then went on to Dorchester, to Exeter, to 
Taunton, and to Wells.  It is astonishing, when we read of the 
enormous injustice and barbarity of this beast, to know that no one 
struck him dead on the judgment-seat.  It was enough for any man or 
woman to be accused by an enemy, before Jeffreys, to be found 
guilty of high treason.  One man who pleaded not guilty, he ordered 
to be taken out of court upon the instant, and hanged; and this so 
terrified the prisoners in general that they mostly pleaded guilty 
at once.  At Dorchester alone, in the course of a few days, 
Jeffreys hanged eighty people; besides whipping, transporting, 
imprisoning, and selling as slaves, great numbers.  He executed, in 
all, two hundred and fifty, or three hundred.

These executions took place, among the neighbours and friends of 
the sentenced, in thirty-six towns and villages.  Their bodies were 
mangled, steeped in caldrons of boiling pitch and tar, and hung up 
by the roadsides, in the streets, over the very churches.  The 
sight and smell of heads and limbs, the hissing and bubbling of the 
infernal caldrons, and the tears and terrors of the people, were 
dreadful beyond all description.  One rustic, who was forced to 
steep the remains in the black pot, was ever afterwards called 'Tom 
Boilman.'  The hangman has ever since been called Jack Ketch, 
because a man of that name went hanging and hanging, all day long, 
in the train of Jeffreys.  You will hear much of the horrors of the 
great French Revolution.  Many and terrible they were, there is no 
doubt; but I know of nothing worse, done by the maddened people of 
France in that awful time, than was done by the highest judge in 
England, with the express approval of the King of England, in The 
Bloody Assize.

Nor was even this all.  Jeffreys was as fond of money for himself 
as of misery for others, and he sold pardons wholesale to fill his 
pockets.  The King ordered, at one time, a thousand prisoners to be 
given to certain of his favourites, in order that they might 
bargain with them for their pardons.  The young ladies of Taunton 
who had presented the Bible, were bestowed upon the maids of honour 
at court; and those precious ladies made very hard bargains with 
them indeed.  When The Bloody Assize was at its most dismal height, 
the King was diverting himself with horse-races in the very place 
where Mrs. Lisle had been executed.  When Jeffreys had done his 
worst, and came home again, he was particularly complimented in the 
Royal Gazette; and when the King heard that through drunkenness and 
raging he was very ill, his odious Majesty remarked that such 
another man could not easily be found in England.  Besides all 
this, a former sheriff of London, named CORNISH, was hanged within 
sight of his own house, after an abominably conducted trial, for 
having had a share in the Rye House Plot, on evidence given by 
Rumsey, which that villain was obliged to confess was directly 
opposed to the evidence he had given on the trial of Lord Russell.  
And on the very same day, a worthy widow, named ELIZABETH GAUNT, 
was burned alive at Tyburn, for having sheltered a wretch who 
himself gave evidence against her.  She settled the fuel about 
herself with her own hands, so that the flames should reach her 
quickly:  and nobly said, with her last breath, that she had obeyed 
the sacred command of God, to give refuge to the outcast, and not 
to betray the wanderer.

After all this hanging, beheading, burning, boiling, mutilating, 
exposing, robbing, transporting, and selling into slavery, of his 
unhappy subjects, the King not unnaturally thought that he could do 
whatever he would.  So, he went to work to change the religion of 
the country with all possible speed; and what he did was this.

He first of all tried to get rid of what was called the Test Act - 
which prevented the Catholics from holding public employments - by 
his own power of dispensing with the penalties.  He tried it in one 
case, and, eleven of the twelve judges deciding in his favour, he 
exercised it in three others, being those of three dignitaries of 
University College, Oxford, who had become Papists, and whom he 
kept in their places and sanctioned.  He revived the hated 
Ecclesiastical Commission, to get rid of COMPTON, Bishop of London, 
who manfully opposed him.  He solicited the Pope to favour England 
with an ambassador, which the Pope (who was a sensible man then) 
rather unwillingly did.  He flourished Father Petre before the eyes 
of the people on all possible occasions.  He favoured the 
establishment of convents in several parts of London.  He was 
delighted to have the streets, and even the court itself, filled 
with Monks and Friars in the habits of their orders.  He constantly 
endeavoured to make Catholics of the Protestants about him.  He 
held private interviews, which he called 'closetings,' with those 
Members of Parliament who held offices, to persuade them to consent 
to the design he had in view.  When they did not consent, they were 
removed, or resigned of themselves, and their places were given to 
Catholics.  He displaced Protestant officers from the army, by 
every means in his power, and got Catholics into their places too.  
He tried the same thing with the corporations, and also (though not 
so successfully) with the Lord Lieutenants of counties.  To terrify 
the people into the endurance of all these measures, he kept an 
army of fifteen thousand men encamped on Hounslow Heath, where mass 
was openly performed in the General's tent, and where priests went 
among the soldiers endeavouring to persuade them to become 
Catholics.  For circulating a paper among those men advising them 
to be true to their religion, a Protestant clergyman, named 
JOHNSON, the chaplain of the late Lord Russell, was actually 
sentenced to stand three times in the pillory, and was actually 
whipped from Newgate to Tyburn.  He dismissed his own brother-in-
law from his Council because he was a Protestant, and made a Privy 
Councillor of the before-mentioned Father Petre.  He handed Ireland 
over to RICHARD TALBOT, EARL OF TYRCONNELL, a worthless, dissolute 
knave, who played the same game there for his master, and who 
played the deeper game for himself of one day putting it under the 
protection of the French King.  In going to these extremities, 
every man of sense and judgment among the Catholics, from the Pope 
to a porter, knew that the King was a mere bigoted fool, who would 
undo himself and the cause he sought to advance; but he was deaf to 
all reason, and, happily for England ever afterwards, went tumbling 
off his throne in his own blind way.

A spirit began to arise in the country, which the besotted 
blunderer little expected.  He first found it out in the University 
of Cambridge.  Having made a Catholic a dean at Oxford without any 
opposition, he tried to make a monk a master of arts at Cambridge:  
which attempt the University resisted, and defeated him.  He then 
went back to his favourite Oxford.  On the death of the President 
of Magdalen College, he commanded that there should be elected to 
succeed him, one MR. ANTHONY FARMER, whose only recommendation was, 
that he was of the King's religion.  The University plucked up 
courage at last, and refused.  The King substituted another man, 
and it still refused, resolving to stand by its own election of a 
MR. HOUGH.  The dull tyrant, upon this, punished Mr. Hough, and 
five-and-twenty more, by causing them to be expelled and declared 
incapable of holding any church preferment; then he proceeded to 
what he supposed to be his highest step, but to what was, in fact, 
his last plunge head-foremost in his tumble off his throne.

He had issued a declaration that there should be no religious tests 
or penal laws, in order to let in the Catholics more easily; but 
the Protestant dissenters, unmindful of themselves, had gallantly 
joined the regular church in opposing it tooth and nail.  The King 
and Father Petre now resolved to have this read, on a certain 
Sunday, in all the churches, and to order it to be circulated for 
that purpose by the bishops.  The latter took counsel with the 
Archbishop of Canterbury, who was in disgrace; and they resolved 
that the declaration should not be read, and that they would 
petition the King against it.  The Archbishop himself wrote out the 
petition, and six bishops went into the King's bedchamber the same 
night to present it, to his infinite astonishment.  Next day was 
the Sunday fixed for the reading, and it was only read by two 
hundred clergymen out of ten thousand.  The King resolved against 
all advice to prosecute the bishops in the Court of King's Bench, 
and within three weeks they were summoned before the Privy Council, 
and committed to the Tower.  As the six bishops were taken to that 
dismal place, by water, the people who were assembled in immense 
numbers fell upon their knees, and wept for them, and prayed for 
them.  When they got to the Tower, the officers and soldiers on 
guard besought them for their blessing.  While they were confined 
there, the soldiers every day drank to their release with loud 
shouts.  When they were brought up to the Court of King's Bench for 
their trial, which the Attorney-General said was for the high 
offence of censuring the Government, and giving their opinion about 
affairs of state, they were attended by similar multitudes, and 
surrounded by a throng of noblemen and gentlemen.  When the jury 
went out at seven o'clock at night to consider of their verdict, 
everybody (except the King) knew that they would rather starve than 
yield to the King's brewer, who was one of them, and wanted a 
verdict for his customer.  When they came into court next morning, 
after resisting the brewer all night, and gave a verdict of not 
guilty, such a shout rose up in Westminster Hall as it had never 
heard before; and it was passed on among the people away to Temple 
Bar, and away again to the Tower.  It did not pass only to the 
east, but passed to the west too, until it reached the camp at 
Hounslow, where the fifteen thousand soldiers took it up and echoed 
it.  And still, when the dull King, who was then with Lord 
Feversham, heard the mighty roar, asked in alarm what it was, and 
was told that it was 'nothing but the acquittal of the bishops,' he 
said, in his dogged way, 'Call you that nothing?  It is so much the 
worse for them.'

Between the petition and the trial, the Queen had given birth to a 
son, which Father Petre rather thought was owing to Saint Winifred.  
But I doubt if Saint Winifred had much to do with it as the King's 
friend, inasmuch as the entirely new prospect of a Catholic 
successor (for both the King's daughters were Protestants) 
determined the EARLS OF SHREWSBURY, DANBY, and DEVONSHIRE, LORD 
LUMLEY, the BISHOP OF LONDON, ADMIRAL RUSSELL, and COLONEL SIDNEY, 
to invite the Prince of Orange over to England.  The Royal Mole, 
seeing his danger at last, made, in his fright, many great 
concessions, besides raising an army of forty thousand men; but the 
Prince of Orange was not a man for James the Second to cope with.  
His preparations were extraordinarily vigorous, and his mind was 
resolved.

For a fortnight after the Prince was ready to sail for England, a 
great wind from the west prevented the departure of his fleet.  
Even when the wind lulled, and it did sail, it was dispersed by a 
storm, and was obliged to put back to refit.  At last, on the first 
of November, one thousand six hundred and eighty-eight, the 
Protestant east wind, as it was long called, began to blow; and on 
the third, the people of Dover and the people of Calais saw a fleet 
twenty miles long sailing gallantly by, between the two places.  On 
Monday, the fifth, it anchored at Torbay in Devonshire, and the 
Prince, with a splendid retinue of officers and men, marched into 
Exeter.  But the people in that western part of the country had 
suffered so much in The Bloody Assize, that they had lost heart.  
Few people joined him; and he began to think of returning, and 
publishing the invitation he had received from those lords, as his 
justification for having come at all.  At this crisis, some of the 
gentry joined him; the Royal army began to falter; an engagement 
was signed, by which all who set their hand to it declared that 
they would support one another in defence of the laws and liberties 
of the three Kingdoms, of the Protestant religion, and of the 
Prince of Orange.  From that time, the cause received no check; the 
greatest towns in England began, one after another, to declare for 
the Prince; and he knew that it was all safe with him when the 
University of Oxford offered to melt down its plate, if he wanted 
any money.

By this time the King was running about in a pitiable way, touching 
people for the King's evil in one place, reviewing his troops in 
another, and bleeding from the nose in a third.  The young Prince 
was sent to Portsmouth, Father Petre went off like a shot to 
France, and there was a general and swift dispersal of all the 
priests and friars.  One after another, the King's most important 
officers and friends deserted him and went over to the Prince.  In 
the night, his daughter Anne fled from Whitehall Palace; and the 
Bishop of London, who had once been a soldier, rode before her with 
a drawn sword in his hand, and pistols at his saddle.  'God help 
me,' cried the miserable King:  'my very children have forsaken 
me!'  In his wildness, after debating with such lords as were in 
London, whether he should or should not call a Parliament, and 
after naming three of them to negotiate with the Prince, he 
resolved to fly to France.  He had the little Prince of Wales 
brought back from Portsmouth; and the child and the Queen crossed 
the river to Lambeth in an open boat, on a miserable wet night, and 
got safely away.  This was on the night of the ninth of December.

At one o'clock on the morning of the eleventh, the King, who had, 
in the meantime, received a letter from the Prince of Orange, 
stating his objects, got out of bed, told LORD NORTHUMBERLAND who 
lay in his room not to open the door until the usual hour in the 
morning, and went down the back stairs (the same, I suppose, by 
which the priest in the wig and gown had come up to his brother) 
and crossed the river in a small boat:  sinking the great seal of 
England by the way.  Horses having been provided, he rode, 
accompanied by SIR EDWARD HALES, to Feversham, where he embarked in 
a Custom House Hoy.  The master of this Hoy, wanting more ballast, 
ran into the Isle of Sheppy to get it, where the fishermen and 
smugglers crowded about the boat, and informed the King of their 
suspicions that he was a 'hatchet-faced Jesuit.'  As they took his 
money and would not let him go, he told them who he was, and that 
the Prince of Orange wanted to take his life; and he began to 
scream for a boat - and then to cry, because he had lost a piece of 
wood on his ride which he called a fragment of Our Saviour's cross.  
He put himself into the hands of the Lord Lieutenant of the county, 
and his detention was made known to the Prince of Orange at Windsor 
- who, only wanting to get rid of him, and not caring where he 
went, so that he went away, was very much disconcerted that they 
did not let him go.  However, there was nothing for it but to have 
him brought back, with some state in the way of Life Guards, to 
Whitehall.  And as soon as he got there, in his infatuation, he 
heard mass, and set a Jesuit to say grace at his public dinner.

The people had been thrown into the strangest state of confusion by 
his flight, and had taken it into their heads that the Irish part 
of the army were going to murder the Protestants.  Therefore, they 
set the bells a ringing, and lighted watch-fires, and burned 
Catholic Chapels, and looked about in all directions for Father 
Petre and the Jesuits, while the Pope's ambassador was running away 
in the dress of a footman.  They found no Jesuits; but a man, who 
had once been a frightened witness before Jeffreys in court, saw a 
swollen, drunken face looking through a window down at Wapping, 
which he well remembered.  The face was in a sailor's dress, but he 
knew it to be the face of that accursed judge, and he seized him.  
The people, to their lasting honour, did not tear him to pieces.  
After knocking him about a little, they took him, in the basest 
agonies of terror, to the Lord Mayor, who sent him, at his own 
shrieking petition, to the Tower for safety.  There, he died.

Their bewilderment continuing, the people now lighted bonfires and 
made rejoicings, as if they had any reason to be glad to have the 
King back again.  But, his stay was very short, for the English 
guards were removed from Whitehall, Dutch guards were marched up to 
it, and he was told by one of his late ministers that the Prince 
would enter London, next day, and he had better go to Ham.  He 
said, Ham was a cold, damp place, and he would rather go to 
Rochester.  He thought himself very cunning in this, as he meant to 
escape from Rochester to France.  The Prince of Orange and his 
friends knew that, perfectly well, and desired nothing more.  So, 
he went to Gravesend, in his royal barge, attended by certain 
lords, and watched by Dutch troops, and pitied by the generous 
people, who were far more forgiving than he had ever been, when 
they saw him in his humiliation.  On the night of the twenty-third 
of December, not even then understanding that everybody wanted to 
get rid of him, he went out, absurdly, through his Rochester 
garden, down to the Medway, and got away to France, where he 
rejoined the Queen.

There had been a council in his absence, of the lords, and the 
authorities of London.  When the Prince came, on the day after the 
King's departure, he summoned the Lords to meet him, and soon 
afterwards, all those who had served in any of the Parliaments of 
King Charles the Second.  It was finally resolved by these 
authorities that the throne was vacant by the conduct of King James 
the Second; that it was inconsistent with the safety and welfare of 
this Protestant kingdom, to be governed by a Popish prince; that 
the Prince and Princess of Orange should be King and Queen during 
their lives and the life of the survivor of them; and that their 
children should succeed them, if they had any.  That if they had 
none, the Princess Anne and her children should succeed; that if 
she had none, the heirs of the Prince of Orange should succeed.

On the thirteenth of January, one thousand six hundred and eighty-
nine, the Prince and Princess, sitting on a throne in Whitehall, 
bound themselves to these conditions.  The Protestant religion was 
established in England, and England's great and glorious Revolution 
was complete.



CHAPTER XXXVII



I HAVE now arrived at the close of my little history.  The events 
which succeeded the famous Revolution of one thousand six hundred 
and eighty-eight, would neither be easily related nor easily 
understood in such a book as this.

William and Mary reigned together, five years.  After the death of 
his good wife, William occupied the throne, alone, for seven years 
longer.  During his reign, on the sixteenth of September, one 
thousand seven hundred and one, the poor weak creature who had once 
been James the Second of England, died in France.  In the meantime 
he had done his utmost (which was not much) to cause William to be 
assassinated, and to regain his lost dominions.  James's son was 
declared, by the French King, the rightful King of England; and was 
called in France THE CHEVALIER SAINT GEORGE, and in England THE 
PRETENDER.  Some infatuated people in England, and particularly in 
Scotland, took up the Pretender's cause from time to time - as if 
the country had not had Stuarts enough! - and many lives were 
sacrificed, and much misery was occasioned.  King William died on 
Sunday, the seventh of March, one thousand seven hundred and two, 
of the consequences of an accident occasioned by his horse 
stumbling with him.  He was always a brave, patriotic Prince, and a 
man of remarkable abilities.  His manner was cold, and he made but 
few friends; but he had truly loved his queen.  When he was dead, a 
lock of her hair, in a ring, was found tied with a black ribbon 
round his left arm.

He was succeeded by the PRINCESS ANNE, a popular Queen, who reigned 
twelve years.  In her reign, in the month of May, one thousand 
seven hundred and seven, the Union between England and Scotland was 
effected, and the two countries were incorporated under the name of 
GREAT BRITAIN.  Then, from the year one thousand seven hundred and 
fourteen to the year one thousand, eight hundred and thirty, 
reigned the four GEORGES.

It was in the reign of George the Second, one thousand seven 
hundred and forty-five, that the Pretender did his last mischief, 
and made his last appearance.  Being an old man by that time, he 
and the Jacobites - as his friends were called - put forward his 
son, CHARLES EDWARD, known as the young Chevalier.  The Highlanders 
of Scotland, an extremely troublesome and wrong-headed race on the 
subject of the Stuarts, espoused his cause, and he joined them, and 
there was a Scottish rebellion to make him king, in which many 
gallant and devoted gentlemen lost their lives.  It was a hard 
matter for Charles Edward to escape abroad again, with a high price 
on his head; but the Scottish people were extraordinarily faithful 
to him, and, after undergoing many romantic adventures, not unlike 
those of Charles the Second, he escaped to France.  A number of 
charming stories and delightful songs arose out of the Jacobite 
feelings, and belong to the Jacobite times.  Otherwise I think the 
Stuarts were a public nuisance altogether.

It was in the reign of George the Third that England lost North 
America, by persisting in taxing her without her own consent.  That 
immense country, made independent under WASHINGTON, and left to 
itself, became the United States; one of the greatest nations of 
the earth.  In these times in which I write, it is honourably 
remarkable for protecting its subjects, wherever they may travel, 
with a dignity and a determination which is a model for England.  
Between you and me, England has rather lost ground in this respect 
since the days of Oliver Cromwell.

The Union of Great Britain with Ireland - which had been getting on 
very ill by itself - took place in the reign of George the Third, 
on the second of July, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-eight.

WILLIAM THE FOURTH succeeded George the Fourth, in the year one 
thousand eight hundred and thirty, and reigned seven years.  QUEEN 
VICTORIA, his niece, the only child of the Duke of Kent, the fourth 
son of George the Third, came to the throne on the twentieth of 
June, one thousand eight hundred and thirty-seven.  She was married 
to PRINCE ALBERT of Saxe Gotha on the tenth of February, one 
thousand eight hundred and forty.  She is very good, and much 
beloved.  So I end, like the crier, with

GOD SAVE THE QUEEN!





End of the Project Gutenberg eText A Child's History of England

Project Gutenberg Etext of Contributions to:  All The Year Round 
#48 in our series by Charles Dickens


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.

Contributions to All The Year Round

by Charles Dickens

September, 1998  [Etext #1464]


Project Gutenberg Etext of Contributions to:  All The Year Round 
******This file should be named allyr10.txt or allyr10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, allyr11.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, allyr10a.txt

This etext was prepared from the 1912 Gresham Publishing Company
edition by David Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk


Project Gutenberg Etexts are usually created from multiple editions,
all of which are in the Public Domain in the United States, unless a
copyright notice is included.  Therefore, we do NOT keep these books
in compliance with any particular paper edition, usually otherwise.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-two text
files per month, or 384 more Etexts in 1998 for a total of 1500+
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach over 150 billion Etexts given away.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only 10% of the present number of computer users.  2001
should have at least twice as many computer users as that, so it
will require us reaching less than 5% of the users in 2001.


We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-
Mellon University).

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext90 through /etext96
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET INDEX?00.GUT
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Carnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





This etext was prepared from the 1912 Gresham Publishing Company
edition by David Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk





Contributions to All The Year Round by Charles Dickens




Contents:


Announcement in "Household Words"
The Poor Man and his Beer
Five New Points of Criminal Law
Leigh Hunt:  A Remonstrance
The Tattlesnivel Bleater
The Young Man from the Country
An Enlightened Clergyman
Rather a Strong Dose
The Martyr Medium
The Late Mr. Stanfield
A Slight Question of Fact
Landor's Life
Address which appeared shortly previous to the completion of the
20th volume



ANNOUNCEMENT IN "HOUSEHOLD WORDS" OF THE APPROACHING PUBLICATION OF
"ALL THE YEAR ROUND"



After the appearance of the present concluding Number of Household
Words, this publication will merge into the new weekly publication,
All the Year Round, and the title, Household Words, will form a part
of the title-page of All the Year Round.

The Prospectus of the latter Journal describes it in these words:


"ADDRESS


"Nine years of Household Words, are the best practical assurance
that can be offered to the public, of the spirit and objects of All
the Year Round.

"In transferring myself, and my strongest energies, from the
publication that is about to be discontinued, to the publication
that is about to be begun, I have the happiness of taking with me
the staff of writers with whom I have laboured, and all the literary
and business co-operation that can make my work a pleasure.  In some
important respects, I am now free greatly to advance on past
arrangements.  Those, I leave to testify for themselves in due
course.

"That fusion of the graces of the imagination with the realities of
life, which is vital to the welfare of any community, and for which
I have striven from week to week as honestly as I could during the
last nine years, will continue to be striven for "all the year
round".  The old weekly cares and duties become things of the Past,
merely to be assumed, with an increased love for them and brighter
hopes springing out of them, in the Present and the Future.

"I look, and plan, for a very much wider circle of readers, and yet
again for a steadily expanding circle of readers, in the projects I
hope to carry through "all the year round".  And I feel confident
that this expectation will be realized, if it deserve realization.

"The task of my new journal is set, and it will steadily try to work
the task out.  Its pages shall show to what good purpose their motto
is remembered in them, and with how much of fidelity and earnestness
they tell

"the story of our lives from year to year.

"CHARLES DICKENS."


Since this was issued, the Journal itself has come into existence,
and has spoken for itself five weeks.  Its fifth Number is published
to-day, and its circulation, moderately stated, trebles that now
relinquished in Household Words.

In referring our readers, henceforth, to All the Year Round, we can
but assure them afresh, of our unwearying and faithful service, in
what is at once the work and the chief pleasure of our life.
Through all that we are doing, and through all that we design to do,
our aim is to do our best in sincerity of purpose, and true devotion
of spirit.

We do not for a moment suppose that we may lean on the character of
these pages, and rest contented at the point where they stop.  We
see in that point but a starting-place for our new journey; and on
that journey, with new prospects opening out before us everywhere,
we joyfully proceed, entreating our readers--without any of the pain
of leave-taking incidental to most journeys--to bear us company All
the year round.

Saturday, May 28, 1859.



THE POOR MAN AND HIS BEER



My friend Philosewers and I, contemplating a farm-labourer the other
day, who was drinking his mug of beer on a settle at a roadside ale-
house door, we fell to humming the fag-end of an old ditty, of which
the poor man and his beer, and the sin of parting them, form the
doleful burden.  Philosewers then mentioned to me that a friend of
his in an agricultural county--say a Hertfordshire friend--had, for
two years last past, endeavoured to reconcile the poor man and his
beer to public morality, by making it a point of honour between
himself and the poor man that the latter should use his beer and not
abuse it.  Interested in an effort of so unobtrusive and
unspeechifying a nature, "O Philosewers," said I, after the manner
of the dreary sages in Eastern apologues, "Show me, I pray, the man
who deems that temperance can be attained without a medal, an
oration, a banner, and a denunciation of half the world, and who has
at once the head and heart to set about it!"

Philosewers expressing, in reply, his willingness to gratify the
dreary sage, an appointment was made for the purpose.  And on the
day fixed, I, the Dreary one, accompanied by Philosewers, went down
Nor'-West per railway, in search of temperate temperance.  It was a
thunderous day; and the clouds were so immoderately watery, and so
very much disposed to sour all the beer in Hertfordshire, that they
seemed to have taken the pledge.

But, the sun burst forth gaily in the afternoon, and gilded the old
gables, and old mullioned windows, and old weathercock and old
clock-face, of the quaint old house which is the dwelling of the man
we sought.  How shall I describe him?  As one of the most famous
practical chemists of the age?  That designation will do as well as
another--better, perhaps, than most others.  And his name?  Friar
Bacon.

"Though, take notice, Philosewers," said I, behind my hand, "that
the first Friar Bacon had not that handsome lady-wife beside him.
Wherein, O Philosewers, he was a chemist, wretched and forlorn,
compared with his successor.  Young Romeo bade the holy father
Lawrence hang up philosophy, unless philosophy could make a Juliet.
Chemistry would infallibly be hanged if its life were staked on
making anything half so pleasant as this Juliet."  The gentle
Philosewers smiled assent.

The foregoing whisper from myself, the Dreary one, tickled the ear
of Philosewers, as we walked on the trim garden terrace before
dinner, among the early leaves and blossoms; two peacocks,
apparently in very tight new boots, occasionally crossing the gravel
at a distance.  The sun, shining through the old house-windows, now
and then flashed out some brilliant piece of colour from bright
hangings within, or upon the old oak panelling; similarly, Friar
Bacon, as we paced to and fro, revealed little glimpses of his good
work.

"It is not much," said he.  "It is no wonderful thing.  There used
to be a great deal of drunkenness here, and I wanted to make it
better if I could.  The people are very ignorant, and have been much
neglected, and I wanted to make THAT better, if I could.  My utmost
object was, to help them to a little self-government and a little
homely pleasure.  I only show the way to better things, and advise
them.  I never act for them; I never interfere; above all, I never
patronise."

I had said to Philosewers as we came along Nor'-West that patronage
was one of the curses of England; I appeared to rise in the
estimation of Philosewers when thus confirmed.

"And so," said Friar Bacon, "I established my Allotment-club, and my
pig-clubs, and those little Concerts by the ladies of my own family,
of which we have the last of the season this evening.  They are a
great success, for the people here are amazingly fond of music.  But
there is the early dinner-bell, and I have no need to talk of my
endeavours when you will soon see them in their working dress".

Dinner done, behold the Friar, Philosewers, and myself the Dreary
one, walking, at six o'clock, across the fields, to the "Club-
house."

As we swung open the last field-gate and entered the Allotment-
grounds, many members were already on their way to the Club, which
stands in the midst of the allotments.  Who could help thinking of
the wonderful contrast between these club-men and the club-men of
St. James's Street, or Pall Mall, in London!  Look at yonder
prematurely old man, doubled up with work, and leaning on a rude
stick more crooked than himself, slowly trudging to the club-house,
in a shapeless hat like an Italian harlequin's, or an old brown-
paper bag, leathern leggings, and dull green smock-frock, looking as
though duck-weed had accumulated on it--the result of its stagnant
life--or as if it were a vegetable production, originally meant to
blow into something better, but stopped somehow.  Compare him with
Old Cousin Feenix, ambling along St. James's Street, got up in the
style of a couple of generations ago, and with a head of hair, a
complexion, and a set of teeth, profoundly impossible to be believed
in by the widest stretch of human credulity.  Can they both be men
and brothers?  Verily they are.  And although Cousin Feenix has
lived so fast that he will die at Baden-Baden, and although this
club-man in the frock has lived, ever since he came to man's estate,
on nine shillings a week, and is sure to die in the Union if he die
in bed, yet he brought as much into the world as Cousin Feenix, and
will take as much out--more, for more of him is real.

A pretty, simple building, the club-house, with a rustic colonnade
outside, under which the members can sit on wet evenings, looking at
the patches of ground they cultivate for themselves; within, a well-
ventilated room, large and lofty, cheerful pavement of coloured
tiles, a bar for serving out the beer, good supply of forms and
chairs, and a brave big chimney-corner, where the fire burns
cheerfully.  Adjoining this room, another:

"Built for a reading-room," said Friar Bacon; "but not much used--
yet."

The dreary sage, looking in through the window, perceiving a fixed
reading-desk within, and inquiring its use:

"I have Service there," said Friar Bacon.  "They never went anywhere
to hear prayers, and of course it would be hopeless to help them to
be happier and better, if they had no religious feeling at all."

"The whole place is very pretty."  Thus the sage.

"I am glad you think so.  I built it for the holders of the
Allotment-grounds, and gave it them:  only requiring them to manage
it by a committee of their own appointing, and never to get drunk
there.  They never have got drunk there."

"Yet they have their beer freely?"

"O yes.  As much as they choose to buy.  The club gets its beer
direct from the brewer, by the barrel.  So they get it good; at once
much cheaper, and much better, than at the public-house.  The
members take it in turns to be steward, and serve out the beer:  if
a man should decline to serve when his turn came, he would pay a
fine of twopence.  The steward lasts, as long as the barrel lasts.
When there is a new barrel, there is a new steward."

"What a noble fire is roaring up that chimney!"

"Yes, a capital fire.  Every member pays a halfpenny a week."

"Every member must be the holder of an Allotment-garden?"

"Yes; for which he pays five shillings a year.  The Allotments you
see about us, occupy some sixteen or eighteen acres, and each garden
is as large as experience shows one man to be able to manage.  You
see how admirably they are tilled, and how much they get off them.
They are always working in them in their spare hours; and when a man
wants a mug of beer, instead of going off to the village and the
public-house, he puts down his spade or his hoe, comes to the club-
house and gets it, and goes back to his work.  When he has done
work, he likes to have his beer at the club, still, and to sit and
look at his little crops as they thrive."

"They seem to manage the club very well."

"Perfectly well.  Here are their own rules.  They made them.  I
never interfere with them, except to advise them when they ask me."


RULES AND REGULATIONS
MADE BY THE COMMITTEE
From the 21st September, 1857

One half-penny per week to be paid to the club by each member

1.--Each member to draw the beer in order, according to the number
of his allotment; on failing, a forfeit of twopence to be paid to
the club.

2.--The member that draws the beer to pay for the same, and bring
his ticket up receipted when the subscriptions are paid; on failing
to do so, a penalty of sixpence to be forfeited and paid to the
club.

3.--The subscriptions and forfeits to be paid at the club-room on
the last Saturday night of each month.

4.--The subscriptions and forfeits to be cleared up every quarter;
if not, a penalty of sixpence to be paid to the club.

5.--The member that draws the beer to be at the club-room by six
o'clock every evening, and stay till ten; but in the event of no
member being there, he may leave at nine; on failing so to attend, a
penalty of sixpence to be paid to the club.

6.--Any member giving beer to a stranger in this club-room,
excepting to his wife or family, shall be liable to the penalty of
one shilling.

7.--Any member lifting his hand to strike another in this club-room
shall be liable to the penalty of sixpence.

8.--Any member swearing in this club-room shall be liable to a
penalty of twopence each time.

9.--Any member selling beer shall be expelled from the club.

10.--Any member wishing to give up his allotment, may apply to the
committee, and they shall value the crop and the condition of the
ground.  The amount of the valuation shall be paid by the succeeding
tenant, who shall be allowed to enter on any part of the allotment
which is uncropped at the time of notice of the leaving tenant.

11.--Any member not keeping his allotment-garden clear from seed-
weeds, or otherwise injuring his neighbours, may be turned out of
his garden by the votes of two-thirds of the committee, one month's
notice being given to him.

12.--Any member carelessly breaking a mug, is to pay the cost of
replacing the same.


I was soliciting the attention of Philosewers to some old old
bonnets hanging in the Allotment-gardens to frighten the birds, and
the fashion of which I should think would terrify a French bird to
death at any distance, when Philosewers solicited my attention to
the scrapers at the club-house door.  The amount of the soil of
England which every member brought there on his feet, was indeed
surprising; and even I, who am professedly a salad-eater, could have
grown a salad for my dinner, in the earth on any member's frock or
hat.

"Now," said Friar Bacon, looking at his watch, "for the Pig-clubs!"

The dreary Sage entreated explanation.

"Why, a pig is so very valuable to a poor labouring man, and it is
so very difficult for him at this time of the year to get money
enough to buy one, that I lend him a pound for the purpose.  But, I
do it in this way.  I leave such of the club members as choose it
and desire it, to form themselves into parties of five.  To every
man in each company of five, I lend a pound, to buy a pig.  But,
each man of the five becomes bound for every other man, as to the
repayment of his money.  Consequently, they look after one another,
and pick out their partners with care; selecting men in whom they
have confidence."

"They repay the money, I suppose, when the pig is fattened, killed,
and sold?"

"Yes.  Then they repay the money.  And they do repay it.  I had one
man, last year, who was a little tardy (he was in the habit of going
to the public-house); but even he did pay.  It is an immense
Advantage to one of these poor fellows to have a pig.  The pig
consumes the refuse from the man's cottage and allotment-garden, and
the pig's refuse enriches the man's garden besides.  The pig is the
poor man's friend.  Come into the club-house again."

The poor man's friend.  Yes.  I have often wondered who really was
the poor man's friend among a great number of competitors, and I now
clearly perceive him to be the pig.  HE never makes any flourishes
about the poor man.  HE never gammons the poor man--except to his
manifest advantage in the article of bacon.  HE never comes down to
this house, or goes down to his constituents.  He openly declares to
the poor man, "I want my sty because I am a Pig.  I desire to have
as much to eat as you can by any means stuff me with, because I am a
Pig."  HE never gives the poor man a sovereign for bringing up a
family.  HE never grunts the poor man's name in vain.  And when he
dies in the odour of Porkity, he cuts up, a highly useful creature
and a blessing to the poor man, from the ring in his snout to the
curl in his tail.  Which of the poor man's other friends can say as
much?  Where is the M.P. who means Mere Pork?

The dreary Sage had glided into these reflections, when he found
himself sitting by the club-house fire, surrounded by green smock-
frocks and shapeless hats:  with Friar Bacon lively, busy, and
expert, at a little table near him.

"Now, then, come.  The first five!" said Friar Bacon.  "Where are
you?"

"Order!" cried a merry-faced little man, who had brought his young
daughter with him to see life, and who always modestly hid his face
in his beer-mug after he had thus assisted the business.

"John Nightingale, William Thrush, Joseph Blackbird, Cecil Robin,
and Thomas Linnet!" cried Friar Bacon.

"Here, sir!" and "Here, sir!"  And Linnet, Robin, Blackbird, Thrush,
and Nightingale, stood confessed.

We, the undersigned, declare, in effect, by this written paper, that
each of us is responsible for the repayment of this pig-money by
each of the other.  "Sure you understand, Nightingale?"

"Ees, sur."

"Can you write your name, Nightingale?"

"Na, sur."

Nightingale's eye upon his name, as Friar Bacon wrote it, was a
sight to consider in after years.  Rather incredulous was
Nightingale, with a hand at the corner of his mouth, and his head on
one side, as to those drawings really meaning him.  Doubtful was
Nightingale whether any virtue had gone out of him in that committal
to paper.  Meditative was Nightingale as to what would come of young
Nightingale's growing up to the acquisition of that art.  Suspended
was the interest of Nightingale, when his name was done--as if he
thought the letters were only sown, to come up presently in some
other form.  Prodigious, and wrong-handed was the cross made by
Nightingale on much encouragement--the strokes directed from him
instead of towards him; and most patient and sweet-humoured was the
smile of Nightingale as he stepped back into a general laugh.

"Order!" cried the little man.  Immediately disappearing into his
mug.

"Ralph Mangel, Roger Wurzel, Edward Vetches, Matthew Carrot, and
Charles Taters!" said Friar Bacon.

"All here, sir."

"You understand it, Mangel?"

"Iss, sir, I unnerstaans it."

"Can you write your name, Mangel?"

"Iss, sir."

Breathless interest.  A dense background of smock-frocks accumulated
behind Mangel, and many eyes in it looked doubtfully at Friar Bacon,
as who should say, "Can he really though?"  Mangel put down his hat,
retired a little to get a good look at the paper, wetted his right
hand thoroughly by drawing it slowly across his mouth, approached
the paper with great determination, flattened it, sat down at it,
and got well to his work.  Circuitous and sea-serpent-like, were the
movements of the tongue of Mangel while he formed the letters;
elevated were the eyebrows of Mangel and sidelong the eyes, as, with
his left whisker reposing on his left arm, they followed his
performance; many were the misgivings of Mangel, and slow was his
retrospective meditation touching the junction of the letter p with
h; something too active was the big forefinger of Mangel in its
propensity to rub out without proved cause.  At last, long and deep
was the breath drawn by Mangel when he laid down the pen; long and
deep the wondering breath drawn by the background--as if they had
watched his walking across the rapids of Niagara, on stilts, and now
cried, "He has done it!"

But, Mangel was an honest man, if ever honest man lived.  "T'owt to
be a hell, sir," said he, contemplating his work, "and I ha' made a
t on 't."

The over-fraught bosoms of the background found relief in a roar of
laughter.

"OR-DER!" cried the little man.  "CHEER!"  And after that second
word, came forth from his mug no more.

Several other clubs signed, and received their money.  Very few
could write their names; all who could not, pleaded that they could
not, more or less sorrowfully, and always with a shake of the head,
and in a lower voice than their natural speaking voice.  Crosses
could be made standing; signatures must be sat down to.  There was
no exception to this rule.  Meantime, the various club-members
smoked, drank their beer, and talked together quite unrestrained.
They all wore their hats, except when they went up to Friar Bacon's
table.  The merry-faced little man offered his beer, with a natural
good-fellowship, both to the Dreary one and Philosewers.  Both
partook of it with thanks.

"Seven o'clock!" said Friar Bacon.  "And now we better get across to
the concert, men, for the music will be beginning."

The concert was in Friar Bacon's laboratory; a large building near
at hand, in an open field.  The bettermost people of the village and
neighbourhood were in a gallery on one side, and, in a gallery
opposite the orchestra.  The whole space below was filled with the
labouring people and their families, to the number of five or six
hundred.  We had been obliged to turn away two hundred to-night,
Friar Bacon said, for want of room--and that, not counting the boys,
of whom we had taken in only a few picked ones, by reason of the
boys, as a class, being given to too fervent a custom of applauding
with their boot-heels.

The performers were the ladies of Friar Bacon's family, and two
gentlemen; one of them, who presided, a Doctor of Music.  A piano
was the only instrument.  Among the vocal pieces, we had a negro
melody (rapturously encored), the Indian Drum, and the Village
Blacksmith; neither did we want for fashionable Italian, having Ah!
non giunge, and Mi manca la voce.  Our success was splendid; our
good-humoured, unaffected, and modest bearing, a pattern.  As to the
audience, they were far more polite and far more pleased than at the
Opera; they were faultless.  Thus for barely an hour the concert
lasted, with thousands of great bottles looking on from the walls,
containing the results of Friar Bacon's Million and one experiments
in agricultural chemistry; and containing too, no doubt, a variety
of materials with which the Friar could have blown us all through
the roof at five minutes' notice.

God save the Queen being done, the good Friar stepped forward and
said a few words, more particularly concerning two points; firstly,
that Saturday half-holiday, which it would be kind in farmers to
grant; secondly, the additional Allotment-grounds we were going to
establish, in consequence of the happy success of the system, but
which we could not guarantee should entitle the holders to be
members of the club, because the present members must consider and
settle that question for themselves:  a bargain between man and man
being always a bargain, and we having made over the club to them as
the original Allotment-men.  This was loudly applauded, and so, with
contented and affectionate cheering, it was all over.

As Philosewers, and I the Dreary, posted back to London, looking up
at the moon and discussing it as a world preparing for the
habitation of responsible creatures, we expatiated on the honour due
to men in this world of ours who try to prepare it for a higher
course, and to leave the race who live and die upon it better than
they found them.



FIVE NEW POINTS OF CRIMINAL LAW



The existing Criminal Law has been found in trials for Murder, to be
so exceedingly hasty, unfair, and oppressive--in a word, to be so
very objectionable to the amiable persons accused of that
thoughtless act--that it is, we understand, the intention of the
Government to bring in a Bill for its amendment.  We have been
favoured with an outline of its probable provisions.

It will be grounded on the profound principle that the real offender
is the Murdered Person; but for whose obstinate persistency in being
murdered, the interesting fellow-creature to be tried could not have
got into trouble.

Its leading enactments may be expected to resolve themselves under
the following heads:

1.  There shall be no judge.  Strong representations have been made
by highly popular culprits that the presence of this obtrusive
character is prejudicial to their best interests.  The Court will be
composed of a political gentleman, sitting in a secluded room
commanding a view of St. James's Park, who has already more to do
than any human creature can, by any stretch of the human
imagination, be supposed capable of doing.

2.  The jury to consist of Five Thousand Five Hundred and Fifty-five
Volunteers.

3.  The jury to be strictly prohibited from seeing either the
accused or the witnesses.  They are not to be sworn.  They are on no
account to hear the evidence.  They are to receive it, or such
representations of it, as may happen to fall in their way; and they
will constantly write letters about it to all the Papers.

4.  Supposing the trial to be a trial for Murder by poisoning, and
supposing the hypothetical case, or the evidence, for the
prosecution to charge the administration of two poisons, say Arsenic
and Antimony; and supposing the taint of Arsenic in the body to be
possible but not probable, and the presence of Antimony in the body,
to be an absolute certainty; it will then become the duty of the
jury to confine their attention solely to the Arsenic, and entirely
to dismiss the Antimony from their minds.

5.  The symptoms preceding the death of the real offender (or
Murdered Person) being described in evidence by medical
practitioners who saw them, other medical practitioners who never
saw them shall be required to state whether they are inconsistent
with certain known diseases--but, THEY SHALL NEVER BE ASKED WHETHER
THEY ARE NOT EXACTLY CONSISTENT WITH THE ADMINISTRATION OF POISON.
To illustrate this enactment in the proposed Bill by a case:- A
raging mad dog is seen to run into the house where Z lives alone,
foaming at the mouth.  Z and the mad dog are for some time left
together in that house under proved circumstances, irresistibly
leading to the conclusion that Z has been bitten by the dog.  Z is
afterwards found lying on his bed in a state of hydrophobia, and
with the marks of the dog's teeth.  Now, the symptoms of that
disease being identical with those of another disease called
Tetanus, which might supervene on Z's running a rusty nail into a
certain part of his foot, medical practitioners who never saw Z,
shall bear testimony to that abstract fact, and it shall then be
incumbent on the Registrar-General to certify that Z died of a rusty
nail.

It is hoped that these alterations in the present mode of procedure
will not only be quite satisfactory to the accused person (which is
the first great consideration), but will also tend, in a tolerable
degree, to the welfare and safety of society.  For it is not sought
in this moderate and prudent measure to be wholly denied that it is
an inconvenience to Society to be poisoned overmuch.



LEIGH HUNT:  A REMONSTRANCE



"The sense of beauty and gentleness, of moral beauty and faithful
gentleness, grew upon him as the clear evening closed in.  When he
went to visit his relative at Putney, he still carried with him his
work, and the books he more immediately wanted.  Although his bodily
powers had been giving way, his most conspicuous qualities, his
memory for books, and his affection remained; and when his hair was
white, when his ample chest had grown slender, when the very
proportion of his height had visibly lessened, his step was still
ready, and his dark eyes brightened at every happy expression, and
at every thought of kindness.  His death was simply exhaustion; he
broke off his work to lie down and repose.  So gentle was the final
approach, that he scarcely recognised it till the very last, and
then it came without terrors.  His physical suffering had not been
severe; at the latest hour he said that his only uneasiness was
failing breath.  And that failing breath was used to express his
sense of the inexhaustible kindness he had received from the family
who had been so unexpectedly made his nurses,--to draw from one of
his sons, by minute, eager, and searching questions, all that he
could learn about the latest vicissitudes and growing hopes of
Italy,--to ask the friends and children around him for news of those
whom he loved,--and to send love and messages to the absent who
loved him."


Thus, with a manly simplicity and filial affection, writes the
eldest son of Leigh Hunt in recording his father's death.  These are
the closing words of a new edition of The Autobiography of Leigh
Hunt, published by Messrs. Smith and Elder, of Cornhill, revised by
that son, and enriched with an introductory chapter of remarkable
beauty and tenderness.  The son's first presentation of his father
to the reader, "rather tall, straight as an arrow, looking slenderer
than he really was; his hair black and shining, and slightly
inclined to wave; his head high, his forehead straight and white,
his eyes black and sparkling, his general complexion dark; in his
whole carriage and manner an extraordinary degree of life,"
completes the picture.  It is the picture of the flourishing and
fading away of man that is born of a woman and hath but a short time
to live.

In his presentation of his father's moral nature and intellectual
qualities, Mr Hunt is no less faithful and no less touching.  Those
who knew Leigh Hunt, will see the bright face and hear the musical
voice again, when he is recalled to them in this passage:  "Even at
seasons of the greatest depression in his fortunes, he always
attracted many visitors, but still not so much for any repute that
attended him as for his personal qualities.  Few men were more
attractive, in society, whether in a large company or over the
fireside.  His manners were peculiarly animated; his conversation,
varied, ranging over a great field of subjects, was moved and called
forth by the response of his companion, be that companion
philosopher or student, sage or boy, man or woman; and he was
equally ready for the most lively topics or for the gravest
reflections--his expression easily adapting itself to the tone of
his companion's mind.  With much freedom of manners, he combined a
spontaneous courtesy that never failed, and a considerateness
derived from a ceaseless kindness of heart that invariably
fascinated even strangers."  Or in this:  "His animation, his
sympathy with what was gay and pleasurable; his avowed doctrine of
cultivating cheerfulness, were manifest on the surface, and could be
appreciated by those who knew him in society, most probably even
exaggerated as salient traits, on which he himself insisted WITH A
SORT OF GAY AND OSTENTATIOUS WILFULNESS."

The last words describe one of the most captivating peculiarities of
a most original and engaging man, better than any other words could.
The reader is besought to observe them, for a reason that shall
presently be given.  Lastly:  "The anxiety to recognise the right of
others, the tendency to 'refine', which was noted by an early school
companion, and the propensity to elaborate every thought, made him,
along with the direct argument by which he sustained his own
conviction, recognise and almost admit all that might be said on the
opposite side".  For these reasons, and for others suggested with
equal felicity, and with equal fidelity, the son writes of the
father, "It is most desirable that his qualities should be known as
they were; for such deficiencies as he had are the honest
explanation of his mistakes; while, as the reader may see from his
writings and his conduct, they are not, as the faults of which he
was accused would be, incompatible with the noblest faculties both
of head and heart.  To know Leigh Hunt as he was, was to hold him in
reverence and love."

These quotations are made here, with a special object.  It is not,
that the personal testimony of one who knew Leigh Hunt well, may be
borne to their truthfulness.  It is not, that it may be recorded in
these pages, as in his son's introductory chapter, that his life was
of the most amiable and domestic kind, that his wants were few, that
his way of life was frugal, that he was a man of small expenses, no
ostentations, a diligent labourer, and a secluded man of letters.
It is not, that the inconsiderate and forgetful may be reminded of
his wrongs and sufferings in the days of the Regency, and of the
national disgrace of his imprisonment.  It is not, that their
forbearance may be entreated for his grave, in right of his graceful
fancy or his political labours and endurances, though -


Not only we, the latest seed of Time,
New men, that in the flying of a wheel
Cry down the past, not only we, that prate
Of rights and wrongs, have loved the people well.


It is, that a duty may be done in the most direct way possible.  An
act of plain, clear duty.

Four or five years ago, the writer of these lines was much pained by
accidentally encountering a printed statement, "that Mr. Leigh Hunt
was the original of Harold Skimpole in Bleak House".  The writer of
these lines, is the author of that book.  The statement came from
America.  It is no disrespect to that country, in which the writer
has, perhaps, as many friends and as true an interest as any man
that lives, good-humouredly to state the fact, that he has, now and
then, been the subject of paragraphs in Transatlantic newspapers,
more surprisingly destitute of all foundation in truth than the
wildest delusions of the wildest lunatics.  For reasons born of this
experience, he let the thing go by.

But, since Mr. Leigh Hunt's death, the statement has been revived in
England.  The delicacy and generosity evinced in its revival, are
for the rather late consideration of its revivers.  The fact is
this:

Exactly those graces and charms of manner which are remembered in
the words we have quoted, were remembered by the author of the work
of fiction in question, when he drew the character in question.
Above all other things, that "sort of gay and ostentatious
wilfulness" in the humouring of a subject, which had many a time
delighted him, and impressed him as being unspeakably whimsical and
attractive, was the airy quality he wanted for the man he invented.
Partly for this reason, and partly (he has since often grieved to
think) for the pleasure it afforded him to find that delightful
manner reproducing itself under his hand, he yielded to the
temptation of too often making the character SPEAK like his old
friend.  He no more thought, God forgive him! that the admired
original would ever be charged with the imaginary vices of the
fictitious creature, than he has himself ever thought of charging
the blood of Desdemona and Othello, on the innocent Academy model
who sat for Iago's leg in the picture.  Even as to the mere
occasional manner, he meant to be so cautious and conscientious,
that he privately referred the proof sheets of the first number of
that book to two intimate literary friends of Leigh Hunt (both still
living), and altered the whole of that part of the text on their
discovering too strong a resemblance to his "way".

He cannot see the son lay this wreath on the father's tomb, and
leave him to the possibility of ever thinking that the present words
might have righted the father's memory and were left unwritten.  He
cannot know that his own son may have to explain his father when
folly or malice can wound his heart no more, and leave this task
undone.



THE TATTLESNIVEL BLEATER



The pen is taken in hand on the present occasion, by a private
individual (not wholly unaccustomed to literary composition), for
the exposure of a conspiracy of a most frightful nature; a
conspiracy which, like the deadly Upas-tree of Java, on which the
individual produced a poem in his earlier youth (not wholly devoid
of length), which was so flatteringly received (in circles not
wholly unaccustomed to form critical opinions), that he was
recommended to publish it, and would certainly have carried out the
suggestion, but for private considerations (not wholly unconnected
with expense).

The individual who undertakes the exposure of the gigantic
conspiracy now to be laid bare in all its hideous deformity, is an
inhabitant of the town of Tattlesnivel--a lowly inhabitant, it may
be, but one who, as an Englishman and a man, will ne'er abase his
eye before the gaudy and the mocking throng.

Tattlesnivel stoops to demand no championship from her sons.  On an
occasion in History, our bluff British monarch, our Eighth Royal
Harry, almost went there.  And long ere the periodical in which this
exposure will appear, had sprung into being, Tattlesnivel had
unfurled that standard which yet waves upon her battlements.  The
standard alluded to, is THE TATTLESNIVEL BLEATER, containing the
latest intelligence, and state of markets, down to the hour of going
to press, and presenting a favourable local medium for advertisers,
on a graduated scale of charges, considerably diminishing in
proportion to the guaranteed number of insertions.

It were bootless to expatiate on the host of talent engaged in
formidable phalanx to do fealty to the Bleater.  Suffice it to
select, for present purposes, one of the most gifted and (but for
the wide and deep ramifications of an un-English conspiracy) most
rising, of the men who are bold Albion's pride.  It were needless,
after this preamble, to point the finger more directly at the LONDON
CORRESPONDENT OF THE TATTLESNIVEL BLEATER.

On the weekly letters of that Correspondent, on the flexibility of
their English, on the boldness of their grammar, on the originality
of their quotations (never to be found as they are printed, in any
book existing), on the priority of their information, on their
intimate acquaintance with the secret thoughts and unexecuted
intentions of men, it would ill become the humble Tattlesnivellian
who traces these words, to dwell.  They are graven in the memory;
they are on the Bleater's file.  Let them be referred to.

But from the infamous, the dark, the subtle conspiracy which spreads
its baleful roots throughout the land, and of which the Bleater's
London Correspondent is the one sole subject, it is the purpose of
the lowly Tattlesnivellian who undertakes this revelation, to tear
the veil.  Nor will he shrink from his self-imposed labour,
Herculean though it be.

The conspiracy begins in the very Palace of the Sovereign Lady of
our Ocean Isle.  Leal and loyal as it is the proud vaunt of the
Bleater's readers, one and all, to be, the inhabitant who pens this
exposure does not personally impeach, either her Majesty the queen,
or the illustrious Prince Consort.  But, some silken-clad smoothers,
some purple parasites, some fawners in frippery, some greedy and
begartered ones in gorgeous garments, he does impeach--ay, and
wrathfully!  Is it asked on what grounds?  They shall be stated.

The Bleater's London Correspondent, in the prosecution of his
important inquiries, goes down to Windsor, sends in his card, has a
confidential interview with her Majesty and the illustrious Prince
Consort.  For a time, the restraints of Royalty are thrown aside in
the cheerful conversation of the Bleater's London Correspondent, in
his fund of information, in his flow of anecdote, in the atmosphere
of his genius; her Majesty brightens, the illustrious Prince Consort
thaws, the cares of State and the conflicts of Party are forgotten,
lunch is proposed.  Over that unassuming and domestic table, her
Majesty communicates to the Bleater's London Correspondent that it
is her intention to send his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales to
inspect the top of the Great Pyramid--thinking it likely to improve
his acquaintance with the views of the people.  Her Majesty further
communicates that she has made up her royal mind (and that the
Prince Consort has made up his illustrious mind) to the bestowal of
the vacant Garter, let us say on Mr. Roebuck.  The younger Royal
children having been introduced at the request of the Bleater's
London Correspondent, and having been by him closely observed to
present the usual external indications of good health, the happy
knot is severed, with a sigh the Royal bow is once more strung to
its full tension, the Bleater's London Correspondent returns to
London, writes his letter, and tells the Tattlesnivel Bleater what
he knows.  All Tattlesnivel reads it, and knows that he knows it.
But, DOES his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales ultimately go to
the top of the Great Pyramid?  DOES Mr. Roebuck ultimately get the
Garter?  No.  Are the younger Royal children even ultimately found
to be well?  On the contrary, they have--and on that very day had--
the measles.  Why is this?  BECAUSE THE CONSPIRATORS AGAINST THE
BLEATER'S LONDON CORRESPONDENT HAVE STEPPED IN WITH THEIR DARK
MACHINATIONS.  Because her Majesty and the Prince Consort are
artfully induced to change their minds, from north to south, from
east to west, immediately after it is known to the conspirators that
they have put themselves in communication with the Bleater's London
Correspondent.  It is now indignantly demanded, by whom are they so
tampered with?  It is now indignantly demanded, who took the
responsibility of concealing the indisposition of those Royal
children from their Royal and illustrious parents, and of bringing
them down from their beds, disguised, expressly to confound the
London Correspondent of the Tattlesnivel Bleater?  Who are those
persons, it is again asked?  Let not rank and favour protect them.
Let the traitors be exhibited in the face of day!

Lord John Russell is in this conspiracy.  Tell us not that his
Lordship is a man of too much spirit and honour.  Denunciation is
hurled against him.  The proof?  The proof is here.

The Time is panting for an answer to the question, Will Lord John
Russell consent to take office under Lord Palmerston?  Good.  The
London Correspondent of the Tattlesnivel Bleater is in the act of
writing his weekly letter, finds himself rather at a loss to settle
this question finally, leaves off, puts his hat on, goes down to the
lobby of the House of Commons, sends in for Lord John Russell, and
has him out.  He draws his arm through his Lordship's, takes him
aside, and says, "John, will you ever accept office under
Palmerston?"  His Lordship replies, "I will not."  The Bleater's
London Correspondent retorts, with the caution such a man is bound
to use, "John, think again; say nothing to me rashly; is there any
temper here?"  His Lordship replies, calmly, "None whatever."  After
giving him time for reflection, the Bleater's London Correspondent
says, "Once more, John, let me put a question to you.  Will you ever
accept office under Palmerston?"  His Lordship answers (note the
exact expressions), "Nothing shall induce me, ever to accept a seat
in a Cabinet of which Palmerston is the Chief."  They part, the
London Correspondent of the Tattlesnivel Bleater finishes his
letter, and--always being withheld by motives of delicacy, from
plainly divulging his means of getting accurate information on every
subject, at first hand--puts in it, this passage:  "Lord John
Russell is spoken of, by blunderers, for Foreign Affairs; but I have
the best reasons for assuring your readers, that" (giving prominence
to the exact expressions, it will be observed) "'NOTHING WILL EVER
INDUCE HIM, TO ACCEPT A SEAT IN A CABINET OF WHICH PALMERSTON IS THE
CHIEF.'  On this you may implicitly rely."  What happens?  On the
very day of the publication of that number of the Bleater--the
malignity of the conspirators being even manifested in the selection
of the day--Lord John Russell takes the Foreign Office!  Comment
were superfluous.

The people of Tattlesnivel will be told, have been told, that Lord
John Russell is a man of his word.  He may be, on some occasions;
but, when overshadowed by this dark and enormous growth of
conspiracy, Tattlesnivel knows him to be otherwise.  "I happen to be
certain, deriving my information from a source which cannot be
doubted to be authentic," wrote the London Correspondent of the
Bleater, within the last year, "that Lord John Russell bitterly
regrets having made that explicit speech of last Monday."  These are
not roundabout phrases; these are plain words.  What does Lord John
Russell (apparently by accident), within eight-and-forty hours after
their diffusion over the civilised globe?  Rises in his place in
Parliament, and unblushingly declares that if the occasion could
arise five hundred times, for his making that very speech, he would
make it five hundred times!  Is there no conspiracy here?  And is
this combination against one who would be always right if he were
not proved always wrong, to be endured in a country that boasts of
its freedom and its fairness?

But, the Tattlesnivellian who now raises his voice against
intolerable oppression, may be told that, after all, this is a
political conspiracy.  He may be told, forsooth, that Mr. Disraeli's
being in it, that Lord Derby's being in it, that Mr. Bright's being
in it, that every Home, Foreign, and Colonial Secretary's being in
it, that every ministry's and every opposition's being in it, are
but proofs that men will do in politics what they would do in
nothing else.  Is this the plea?  If so, the rejoinder is, that the
mighty conspiracy includes the whole circle of Artists of all kinds,
and comprehends all degrees of men, down to the worst criminal and
the hangman who ends his career.  For, all these are intimately
known to the London Correspondent of the Tattlesnivel Bleater, and
all these deceive him.

Sir, put it to the proof.  There is the Bleater on the file--
documentary evidence.  Weeks, months, before the Exhibition of the
Royal Academy, the Bleater's London Correspondent knows the subjects
of all the leading pictures, knows what the painters first meant to
do, knows what they afterwards substituted for what they first meant
to do, knows what they ought to do and won't do, knows what they
ought not to do and will do, knows to a letter from whom they have
commissions, knows to a shilling how much they are to be paid.  Now,
no sooner is each studio clear of the remarkable man to whom each
studio-occupant has revealed himself as he does not reveal himself
to his nearest and dearest bosom friend, than conspiracy and fraud
begin.  Alfred the Great becomes the Fairy Queen; Moses viewing the
Promised Land, turns out to be Moses going to the Fair; Portrait of
His Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury, is transformed, as if by
irreverent enchantment of the dissenting interest, into A Favourite
Terrier, or Cattle Grazing; and the most extraordinary work of art
in the list described by the Bleater, is coolly sponged out
altogether, and asserted never to have had existence at all, even in
the most shadow thoughts of its executant!  This is vile enough, but
this is not all.  Picture-buyers then come forth from their secret
positions, and creep into their places in the assassin-multitude of
conspirators.  Mr. Baring, after expressly telling the Bleater's
London Correspondent that he had bought No. 39 for one thousand
guineas, gives it up to somebody unknown for a couple of hundred
pounds; the Marquis of Lansdowne pretends to have no knowledge
whatever of the commissions to which the London Correspondent of the
Bleater swore him, but allows a Railway Contractor to cut him out
for half the money.  Similar examples might be multiplied.  Shame,
shame, on these men!  Is this England?

Sir, look again at Literature.  The Bleater's London Correspondent
is not merely acquainted with all the eminent writers, but is in
possession of the secrets of their souls.  He is versed in their
hidden meanings and references, sees their manuscripts before
publication, and knows the subjects and titles of their books when
they are not begun.  How dare those writers turn upon the eminent
man and depart from every intention they have confided to him?  How
do they justify themselves in entirely altering their manuscripts,
changing their titles, and abandoning their subjects?  Will they
deny, in the face of Tattlesnivel, that they do so?  If they have
such hardihood, let the file of the Bleater strike them dumb.  By
their fruits they shall be known.  Let their works be compared with
the anticipatory letters of the Bleater's London Correspondent, and
their falsehood and deceit will become manifest as the sun; it will
be seen that they do nothing which they stand pledged to the
Bleater's London Correspondent to do; it will be seen that they are
among the blackest parties in this black and base conspiracy.  This
will become apparent, sir, not only as to their public proceedings
but as to their private affairs.  The outraged Tattlesnivellian who
now drags this infamous combination into the face of day, charges
those literary persons with making away with their property,
imposing on the Income Tax Commissioners, keeping false books, and
entering into sham contracts.  He accuses them on the unimpeachable
faith of the London Correspondent of the Tattlesnivel Bleater.  With
whose evidence they will find it impossible to reconcile their own
account of any transaction of their lives.

The national character is degenerating under the influence of the
ramifications of this tremendous conspiracy.  Forgery is committed,
constantly.  A person of note--any sort of person of note--dies.
The Bleater's London Correspondent knows what his circumstances are,
what his savings are (if any), who his creditors are, all about his
children and relations, and (in general, before his body is cold)
describes his will.  Is that will ever proved?  Never!  Some other
will is substituted; the real instrument, destroyed.  And this (as
has been before observed), is England.

Who are the workmen and artificers, enrolled upon the books of this
treacherous league?  From what funds are they paid, and with what
ceremonies are they sworn to secrecy?  Are there none such?  Observe
what follows.  A little time ago the Bleater's London Correspondent
had this passage:  "Boddleboy is pianoforte playing at St.
Januarius's Gallery, with pretty tolerable success!  He clears three
hundred pounds per night.  Not bad this!!"  The builder of St.
Januarius's Gallery (plunged to the throat in the conspiracy) met
with this piece of news, and observed, with characteristic
coarseness, "that the Bleater's London Correspondent was a Blind
Ass".  Being pressed by a man of spirit to give his reasons for this
extraordinary statement, he declared that the Gallery, crammed to
suffocation, would not hold two hundred pounds, and that its
expenses were, probably, at least half what it did hold.  The man of
spirit (himself a Tattlesnivellian) had the Gallery measured within
a week from that hour, and it would not hold two hundred pounds!
Now, can the poorest capacity doubt that it had been altered in the
meantime?

And so the conspiracy extends, through every grade of society, down
to the condemned criminal in prison, the hangman, and the Ordinary.
Every famous murderer within the last ten years has desecrated his
last moments by falsifying his confidences imparted specially to the
London Correspondent of the Tattlesnivel Bleater; on every such
occasion, Mr. Calcraft has followed the degrading example; and the
reverend Ordinary, forgetful of his cloth, and mindful only (it
would seem, alas!) of the conspiracy, has committed himself to some
account or other of the criminal's demeanour and conversation, which
has been diametrically opposed to the exclusive information of the
London Correspondent of the Bleater.  And this (as has been before
observed) is Merry England!

A man of true genius, however, is not easily defeated.  The
Bleater's London Correspondent, probably beginning to suspect the
existence of a plot against him, has recently fallen on a new style,
which, as being very difficult to countermine, may necessitate the
organisation of a new conspiracy.  One of his masterly letters,
lately, disclosed the adoption of this style--which was remarked
with profound sensation throughout Tattlesnivel--in the following
passage:  "Mentioning literary small talk, I may tell you that some
new and extraordinary rumours are afloat concerning the
conversations I have previously mentioned, alleged to have taken
place in the first floor front (situated over the street door), of
Mr. X. Ameter (the poet so well known to your readers), in which, X.
Ameter's great uncle, his second son, his butcher, and a corpulent
gentleman with one eye universally respected at Kensington, are said
not to have been on the most friendly footing; I forbear, however,
to pursue the subject further, this week, my informant not being
able to supply me with exact particulars."

But, enough, sir.  The inhabitant of Tattlesnivel who has taken pen
in hand to expose this odious association of unprincipled men
against a shining (local) character, turns from it with disgust and
contempt.  Let him in few words strip the remaining flimsy covering
from the nude object of the conspirators, and his loathsome task is
ended.

Sir, that object, he contends, is evidently twofold.  First, to
exhibit the London Correspondent of the Tattlesnivel Bleater in the
light of a mischievous Blockhead who, by hiring himself out to tell
what he cannot possibly know, is as great a public nuisance as a
Blockhead in a corner can be.  Second, to suggest to the men of
Tattlesnivel that it does not improve their town to have so much Dry
Rubbish shot there.

Now, sir, on both these points Tattlesnivel demands in accents of
Thunder, Where is the Attorney General?  Why doesn't the Times take
it up?  (Is the latter in the conspiracy?  It never adopts his
views, or quotes him, and incessantly contradicts him.)
Tattlesnivel, sir, remembering that our forefathers contended with
the Norman at Hastings, and bled at a variety of other places that
will readily occur to you, demands that its birthright shall not be
bartered away for a mess of pottage.  Have a care, sir, have a care!
Or Tattlesnivel (its idle Rifles piled in its scouted streets) may
be seen ere long, advancing with its Bleater to the foot of the
Throne, and demanding redress for this conspiracy, from the orbed
and sceptred hands of Majesty itself!



THE YOUNG MAN FROM THE COUNTRY



A song of the hour, now in course of being sung and whistled in
every street, the other day reminded the writer of these words--as
he chanced to pass a fag-end of the song for the twentieth time in a
short London walk--that twenty years ago, a little book on the
United States, entitled American Notes, was published by "a Young
Man from the Country", who had just seen and left it.

This Young Man from the Country fell into a deal of trouble, by
reason of having taken the liberty to believe that he perceived in
America downward popular tendencies for which his young enthusiasm
had been anything but prepared.  It was in vain for the Young Man to
offer in extenuation of his belief that no stranger could have set
foot on those shores with a feeling of livelier interest in the
country, and stronger faith in it, than he.  Those were the days
when the Tories had made their Ashburton Treaty, and when Whigs and
Radicals must have no theory disturbed.  All three parties waylaid
and mauled the Young Man from the Country, and showed that he knew
nothing about the country.

As the Young Man from the Country had observed in the Preface to his
little book, that he "could bide his time", he took all this in
silent part for eight years.  Publishing then, a cheap edition of
his book, he made no stronger protest than the following:


"My readers have opportunities of judging for themselves whether the
influences and tendencies which I distrusted in America, have any
existence but in my imagination.  They can examine for themselves
whether there has been anything in the public career of that country
during these past eight years, or whether there is anything in its
present position, at home or abroad, which suggests that those
influences and tendencies really do exist.  As they find the fact,
they will judge me.  If they discern any evidences of wrong-going,
in any direction that I have indicated, they will acknowledge that I
had reason in what I wrote.  If they discern no such thing, they
will consider me altogether mistaken.  I have nothing to defend, or
to explain away.  The truth is the truth; and neither childish
absurdities, nor unscrupulous contradictions, can make it otherwise.
The earth would still move round the sun, though the whole Catholic
Church said No."


Twelve more years having since passed away, it may now, at last, be
simply just towards the Young Man from the Country, to compare what
he originally wrote, with recent events and their plain motive
powers.  Treating of the House of Representatives at Washington, he
wrote thus:


"Did I recognise in this assembly, a body of men, who, applying
themselves in a new world to correct some of the falsehoods and
vices of the old, purified the avenues to Public Life, paved the
dirty ways to Place and Power, debated and made laws for the Common
Good, and had no party but their Country?

"I saw in them, the wheels that move the meanest perversion of
virtuous Political Machinery that the worst tools ever wrought.
Despicable trickery at elections; under-handed tamperings with
public officers; cowardly attacks upon opponents, with scurrilous
newspapers for shields, and hired pens for daggers; shameful
trucklings to mercenary knaves, whose claim to be considered, is,
that every day and week they sow new crops of ruin with their venal
types, which are the dragon's teeth of yore, in everything but
sharpness; aidings and abettings of every bad inclination in the
popular mind, and artful suppressions of all its good influences:
such things as these, and in a word, Dishonest Faction in its most
depraved and most unblushing form, stared out from every corner of
the crowded hall.

"Did I see among them, the intelligence and refinement:  the true,
honest, patriotic heart of America?  Here and there, were drops of
its blood and life, but they scarcely coloured the stream of
desperate adventurers which sets that way for profit and for pay.
It is the game of these men, and of their profligate organs, to make
the strife of politics so fierce and brutal, and so destructive of
all self-respect in worthy men, that sensitive and delicate-minded
persons shall be kept aloof, and they, and such as they, be left to
battle out their selfish views unchecked.  And thus this lowest of
all scrambling fights goes on, and they who in other countries
would, from their intelligence and station, most aspire to make the
laws, do here recoil the farthest from that degradation.

"That there are, among the representatives of the people in both
Houses, and among all parties, some men of high character and great
abilities, I need not say.  The foremost among those politicians who
are known in Europe, have been already described, and I see no
reason to depart from the rule I have laid down for my guidance, of
abstaining from all mention of individuals.  It will be sufficient
to add, that to the most favourable accounts that have been written
of them, I fully and most heartily subscribe; and that personal
intercourse and free communication have bred within me, not the
result predicted in the very doubtful proverb, but increased
admiration and respect."

Towards the end of his book, the Young Man from the Country thus
expressed himself concerning its people:


"They are, by nature, frank, brave, cordial, hospitable, and
affectionate.  Cultivation and refinement seem but to enhance their
warmth of heart and ardent enthusiasm; and it is the possession of
these latter qualities in a most remarkable degree, which renders an
educated American one of the most endearing and most generous of
friends.  I never was so won upon, as by this class; never yielded
up my full confidence and esteem so readily and pleasurably, as to
them; never can make again, in half a year, so many friends for whom
I seem to entertain the regard of half a life.

"These qualities are natural, I implicitly believe, to the whole
people.  That they are, however, sadly sapped and blighted in their
growth among the mass; and that there are influences at work which
endanger them still more, and give but little present promise of
their healthy restoration; is a truth that ought to be told.

"It is an essential part of every national character to pique itself
mightily upon its faults, and to deduce tokens of its virtue or its
wisdom from their very exaggeration.  One great blemish in the
popular mind of America, and the prolific parent of an innumerable
brood of evils, is Universal Distrust.  Yet the American citizen
plumes himself upon this spirit, even when he is sufficiently
dispassionate to perceive the ruin it works; and will often adduce
it, in spite of his own reason, as an instance of the great sagacity
and acuteness of the people, and their superior shrewdness and
independence.

"'You carry,' says the stranger, 'this jealousy and distrust into
every transaction of public life.  By repelling worthy men from your
legislative assemblies, it has bred up a class of candidates for the
suffrage, who, in their every act, disgrace your Institutions and
your people's choice.  It has rendered you so fickle, and so given
to change, that your inconstancy has passed into a proverb; for you
no sooner set up an idol firmly, than you are sure to pull it down
and dash it into fragments:  and this, because directly you reward a
benefactor, or a public-servant, you distrust him, merely because he
IS rewarded; and immediately apply yourselves to find out, either
that you have been too bountiful in your acknowledgments, or he
remiss in his deserts.  Any man who attains a high place among you,
from the President downwards, may date his downfall from that
moment; for any printed lie that any notorious villain pens,
although it militate directly against the character and conduct of a
life, appeals at once to your distrust, and is believed.  You will
strain at a gnat in the way of trustfulness and confidence, however
fairly won and well deserved; but you will swallow a whole caravan
of camels, if they be laden with unworthy doubts and mean
suspicions.  Is this well, think you, or likely to elevate the
character of the governors or the governed, among you?'

"The answer is invariably the same:  'There's freedom of opinion
here, you know.  Every man thinks for himself, and we are not to be
easily overreached.  That's how our people come to be suspicious.'

"Another prominent feature is the love of 'smart' dealing:  which
gilds over many a swindle and gross breach of trust; many a
defalcation, public and private; and enables many a knave to hold
his head up with the best, who well deserves a halter:  though it
has not been without its retributive operation, for this smartness
has done more in a few years to impair the public credit, and to
cripple the public resources, than dull honesty, however rash, could
have effected in a century.  The merits of a broken speculation, or
a bankruptcy, or of a successful scoundrel, are not gauged by its or
his observance of the golden rule, 'Do as you would be done by', but
are considered with reference to their smartness.  I recollect, on
both occasions of our passing that ill-fated Cairo on the
Mississippi, remarking on the bad effects such gross deceits must
have when they exploded, in generating a want of confidence abroad,
and discouraging foreign investment:  but I was given to understand
that this was a very smart scheme by which a deal of money had been
made:  and that its smartest feature was, that they forgot these
things abroad, in a very short time, and speculated again, as freely
as ever.  The following dialogue I have held a hundred times:  'Is
it not a very disgraceful circumstance that such a man as So-and-so
should be acquiring a large property by the most infamous and odious
means, and notwithstanding all the crimes of which he has been
guilty, should be tolerated and abetted by your citizens?  He is a
public nuisance, is he not?'  'Yes, sir.'  'A convicted liar?'
'Yes, sir.'  'He has been kicked, and cuffed, and caned?'  'Yes,
sir.'  'And he is utterly dishonourable, debased, and profligate?'
'Yes, sir.'  'In the name of wonder, then, what is his merit?'
'Well, sir, he is a smart man.'

"But the foul growth of America has a more tangled root than this;
and it strikes its fibres, deep in its licentious Press.

"Schools may he erected, East, West, North, and South; pupils be
taught, and masters reared, by scores upon scores of thousands;
colleges may thrive, churches may be crammed, temperance may be
diffused, and advancing knowledge in all other forms walk through
the land with giant strides; but while the newspaper press of
America is in, or near, its present abject state, high moral
improvement in that country is hopeless.  Year by year, it must and
will go back; year by year, the tone of public opinion must sink
lower down; year by year, the Congress and the Senate must become of
less account before all decent men; and year by year, the memory of
the Great Fathers of the Revolution must be outraged more and more,
in the bad life of their degenerate child.

"Among the herd of journals which are published in the States, there
are some, the reader scarcely need be told, of character and credit.
From personal intercourse with accomplished gentlemen connected with
publications of this class, I have derived both pleasure and profit.
But the name of these is Few, and of the others Legion; and the
influence of the good, is powerless to counteract the moral poison
of the bad.

"Among the gentry of America; among the well-informed and moderate;
in the learned professions; at the bar and on the bench; there is,
as there can be, but one opinion, in reference to the vicious
character of these infamous journals.  It is sometimes contended--I
will not say strangely, for it is natural to seek excuses for such a
disgrace--that their influence is not so great as a visitor would
suppose.  I must be pardoned for saying that there is no warrant for
this plea, and that every fact and circumstance tends directly to
the opposite conclusion.

"When any man, of any grade of desert in intellect or character, can
climb to any public distinction, no matter what, in America, without
first grovelling down upon the earth, and bending the knee before
this monster of depravity; when any private excellence is safe from
its attacks; when any social confidence is left unbroken by it; or
any tie of social decency and honour is held in the least regard;
when any man in that Free Country has freedom of opinion, and
presumes to think for himself, and speak for himself, without humble
reference to a censorship which, for its rampant ignorance and base
dishonesty, he utterly loaths and despises in his heart; when those
who most acutely feel its infamy and the reproach it casts upon the
nation, and who most denounce it to each other, dare to set their
heels upon, and crush it openly, in the sight of all men:  then, I
will believe that its influence is lessening, and men are returning
to their manly senses.  But while that Press has its evil eye in
every house, and its black hand in every appointment in the state,
from a president to a postman; while, with ribald slander for its
only stock in trade, it is the standard literature of an enormous
class, who must find their reading in a newspaper, or they will not
read at all; so long must its odium be upon the country's head, and
so long must the evil it works, be plainly visible in the Republic."


The foregoing was written in the year eighteen hundred and forty-
two.  It rests with the reader to decide whether it has received any
confirmation, or assumed any colour of truth, in or about the year
eighteen hundred and sixty-two.



AN ENLIGHTENED CLERGYMAN



At various places in Suffolk (as elsewhere) penny readings take
place "for the instruction and amusement of the lower classes".
There is a little town in Suffolk called Eye, where the subject of
one of these readings was a tale (by Mr. Wilkie Collins) from the
last Christmas Number of this Journal, entitled "Picking up Waifs at
Sea".  It appears that the Eye gentility was shocked by the
introduction of this rude piece among the taste and musical glasses
of that important town, on which the eyes of Europe are notoriously
always fixed.  In particular, the feelings of the vicar's family
were outraged; and a Local Organ (say, the Tattlesnivel Bleater)
consequently doomed the said piece to everlasting oblivion, as being
of an "injurious tendency!"

When this fearful fact came to the knowledge of the unhappy writer
of the doomed tale in question, he covered his face with his robe,
previous to dying decently under the sharp steel of the
ecclesiastical gentility of the terrible town of Eye.  But the
discovery that he was not alone in his gloomy glory, revived him,
and he still lives.

For, at Stowmarket, in the aforesaid county of Suffolk, at another
of those penny readings, it was announced that a certain juvenile
sketch, culled from a volume of sketches (by Boz) and entitled "The
Bloomsbury Christening", would be read.  Hereupon, the clergyman of
that place took heart and pen, and addressed the following terrific
epistle to a gentleman bearing the very appropriate name of Gudgeon:


STOWMARKET VICARAGE, Feb. 25, 1861.

SIR,--My attention has been directed to a piece called "The
Bloomsbury Christening" which you propose to read this evening.
Without presuming to claim any interference in the arrangement of
the readings, I would suggest to you whether you have on this
occasion sufficiently considered the character of the composition
you have selected.  I quite appreciate the laudable motive of the
promoters of the readings to raise the moral tone amongst the
working class of the town and to direct this taste in a familiar and
pleasant manner.  "The Bloomsbury Christening" cannot possibly do
this.  It trifles with a sacred ordinance, and the language and
style, instead of improving the taste, has a direct tendency to
lower it.

I appeal to your right feeling whether it is desirable to give
publicity to that which must shock several of your audience, and
create a smile amongst others, to be indulged in only by violating
the conscientious scruples of their neighbours.

The ordinance which is here exposed to ridicule is one which is much
misunderstood and neglected amongst many families belonging to the
Church of England, and the mode in which it is treated in this
chapter cannot fail to appear as giving a sanction to, or at least
excusing, such neglect.

Although you are pledged to the public to give this subject, yet I
cannot but believe that they would fully justify your substitution
of it for another did they know the circumstances.  An abridgment
would only lessen the evil in a degree, as it is not only the style
of the writing but the subject itself which is objectionable.

Excuse me for troubling you, but I felt that, in common with
yourself, I have a grave responsibility in the matter, and I am most
truly yours,

T. S. COLES.
To Mr. J. Gudgeon.


It is really necessary to explain that this is not a bad joke.  It
is simply a bad fact.



RATHER A STRONG DOSE



"Doctor John Campbell, the minister of the Tabernacle Chapel,
Finsbury, and editor of the British Banner, etc., with that massive
vigour which distinguishes his style," did, we are informed by Mr.
Howitt, "deliver a verdict in the Banner, for November, 1852," of
great importance and favour to the Table-rapping cause.  We are not
informed whether the Public, sitting in judgment on the question,
reserved any point in this great verdict for subsequent
consideration; but the verdict would seem to have been regarded by a
perverse generation as not quite final, inasmuch as Mr. Howitt finds
it necessary to re-open the case, a round ten years afterwards, in
nine hundred and sixty-two stiff octavo pages, published by Messrs.
Longman and Company.

Mr. Howitt is in such a bristling temper on the Supernatural
subject, that we will not take the great liberty of arguing any
point with him.  But--with the view of assisting him to make
converts--we will inform our readers, on his conclusive authority,
what they are required to believe; premising what may rather
astonish them in connexion with their views of a certain historical
trifle, called The Reformation, that their present state of unbelief
is all the fault of Protestantism, and that "it is high time,
therefore, to protest against Protestantism".

They will please to believe, by way of an easy beginning, all the
stories of good and evil demons, ghosts, prophecies, communication
with spirits, and practice of magic, that ever obtained, or are said
to have ever obtained, in the North, in the South, in the East, in
the West, from the earliest and darkest ages, as to which we have
any hazy intelligence, real or supposititious, down to the yet
unfinished displacement of the red men in North America.  They will
please to believe that nothing in this wise was changed by the
fulfilment of our Saviour's mission upon earth; and further, that
what Saint Paul did, can be done again, and has been done again.  As
this is not much to begin with, they will throw in at this point
rejection of Faraday and Brewster, and "poor Paley", and implicit
acceptance of those shining lights, the Reverend Charles Beecher,
and the Reverend Henry Ward Beecher ("one of the most vigorous and
eloquent preachers of America"), and the Reverend Adin Ballou.

Having thus cleared the way for a healthy exercise of faith, our
advancing readers will next proceed especially to believe in the old
story of the Drummer of Tedworth, in the inspiration of George Fox,
in "the spiritualism, prophecies, and provision" of Huntington the
coal-porter (him who prayed for the leather breeches which
miraculously fitted him), and even in the Cock Lane Ghost.  They
will please wind up, before fetching their breath, with believing
that there is a close analogy between rejection of any such plain
and proved facts as those contained in the whole foregoing
catalogue, and the opposition encountered by the inventors of
railways, lighting by gas, microscopes and telescopes, and
vaccination.  This stinging consideration they will always carry
rankling in their remorseful hearts as they advance.

As touching the Cock Lane Ghost, our conscience-stricken readers
will please particularly to reproach themselves for having ever
supposed that important spiritual manifestation to have been a gross
imposture which was thoroughly detected.  They will please to
believe that Dr. Johnson believed in it, and that, in Mr. Howitt's
words, he "appears to have had excellent reasons for his belief".
With a view to this end, the faithful will be so good as to
obliterate from their Boswells the following passage:  "Many of my
readers, I am convinced, are to this hour under an impression that
Johnson was thus foolishly deceived.  It will therefore surprise
them a good deal when they are informed upon undoubted authority
that Johnson was one of those by whom the imposture was detected.
The story had become so popular, that he thought it should be
investigated, and in this research he was assisted by the Rev. Dr.
Douglas, now Bishop of Salisbury, the great detector of impostures"-
-and therefore tremendously obnoxious to Mr. Howitt--"who informs me
that after the gentlemen who went and examined into the evidence
were satisfied of its falsity, Johnson wrote in their presence an
account of it, which was published in the newspapers and Gentleman's
Magazine, and undeceived the world".  But as there will still remain
another highly inconvenient passage in the Boswells of the true
believers, they must likewise be at the trouble of cancelling the
following also, referring to a later time:  "He (Johnson) expressed
great indignation at the imposture of the Cock Lane Ghost, and
related with much satisfaction how he had assisted in detecting the
cheat, and had published an account of it in the newspapers".

They will next believe (if they be, in the words of Captain Bobadil,
"so generously minded") in the transatlantic trance-speakers "who
professed to speak from direct inspiration", Mrs. Cora Hatch, Mrs.
Henderson, and Miss Emma Hardinge; and they will believe in those
eminent ladies having "spoken on Sundays to five hundred thousand
hearers"--small audiences, by the way, compared with the intelligent
concourse recently assembled in the city of New York, to do honour
to the Nuptials of General the Honourable T. Barnum Thumb.  At about
this stage of their spiritual education they may take the
opportunity of believing in "letters from a distinguished gentleman
of New York, in which the frequent appearance of the gentleman's
deceased wife and of Dr. Franklin, to him and other well-known
friends, are unquestionably unequalled in the annals of the
marvellous".  Why these modest appearances should seem at all out of
the common way to Mr. Howitt (who would be in a state of flaming
indignation if we thought them so), we could not imagine, until we
found on reading further, "it is solemnly stated that the witnesses
have not only seen but touched these spirits, and handled the
clothes and hair of Franklin".  Without presuming to go Mr. Howitt's
length of considering this by any means a marvellous experience, we
yet venture to confess that it has awakened in our mind many
interesting speculations touching the present whereabout in space,
of the spirits of Mr. Howitt's own departed boots and hats.

The next articles of belief are Belief in the moderate figures of
"thirty thousand media in the United States in 1853"; and in two
million five hundred thousand spiritualists in the same country of
composed minds, in 1855, "professing to have arrived at their
convictions of spiritual communication from personal experience";
and in "an average rate of increase of three hundred thousand per
annum", still in the same country of calm philosophers.  Belief in
spiritual knockings, in all manner of American places, and, among
others, in the house of "a Doctor Phelps at Stratford, Connecticut,
a man of the highest character for intelligence", says Mr. Howitt,
and to whom we willingly concede the possession of far higher
intelligence than was displayed by his spiritual knocker, in
"frequently cutting to pieces the clothes of one of his boys", and
in breaking "seventy-one panes of glass"--unless, indeed, the
knocker, when in the body, was connected with the tailoring and
glazing interests.  Belief in immaterial performers playing (in the
dark though:  they are obstinate about its being in the dark) on
material instruments of wood, catgut, brass, tin, and parchment.
Your belief is further requested in "the Kentucky Jerks".  The
spiritual achievements thus euphoniously denominated "appear", says
Mr. Howitt, "to have been of a very disorderly kind".  It appears
that a certain Mr. Doke, a Presbyterian clergyman, "was first seized
by the jerks", and the jerks laid hold of Mr. Doke in that
unclerical way and with that scant respect for his cloth, that they
"twitched him about in a most extraordinary manner, often when in
the pulpit, and caused him to shout aloud, and run out of the pulpit
into the woods, screaming like a madman.  When the fit was over, he
returned calmly to his pulpit and finished the service."  The
congregation having waited, we presume, and edified themselves with
the distant bellowings of Doke in the woods, until he came back
again, a little warm and hoarse, but otherwise in fine condition.
"People were often seized at hotels, and at table would, on lifting
a glass to drink, jerk the liquor to the ceiling; ladies would at
the breakfast-table suddenly be compelled to throw aloft their
coffee, and frequently break the cup and saucer."  A certain
venturesome clergyman vowed that he would preach down the Jerks,
"but he was seized in the midst of his attempt, and made so
ridiculous that he withdrew himself from further notice"--an example
much to be commended.  That same favoured land of America has been
particularly favoured in the development of "innumerable mediums",
and Mr. Howitt orders you to believe in Daniel Dunglas Home, Andrew
Davis Jackson, and Thomas L. Harris, as "the three most remarkable,
or most familiar, on this side of the Atlantic".  Concerning Mr.
Home, the articles of belief (besides removal of furniture) are,
That through him raps have been given and communications made from
deceased friends.  That "his hand has been seized by spirit
influence, and rapid communications written out, of a surprising
character to those to whom they were addressed".  That at his
bidding, "spirit hands have appeared which have been seen, felt, and
recognised frequently, by persons present, as those of deceased
friends".  That he has been frequently lifted up and carried,
floating "as it were" through a room, near the ceiling.  That in
America, "all these phenomena have displayed themselves in greater
force than here"--which we have not the slightest doubt of.  That he
is "the planter of spiritualism all over Europe".  That "by
circumstances that no man could have devised, he became the guest of
the Emperor of the French, of the King of Holland, of the Czar of
Russia, and of many lesser princes".  That he returned from "this
unpremeditated missionary tour", "endowed with competence"; but not
before, "at the Tuileries, on one occasion when the emperor,
empress, a distinguished lady, and himself only were sitting at
table, a hand appeared, took up a pen, and wrote, in a strong and
well-known character, the word Napoleon.  The hand was then
successively presented to the several personages of the party to
kiss."  The stout believer, having disposed of Mr. Home, and rested
a little, will then proceed to believe in Andrew Davis Jackson, or
Andrew Jackson Davis (Mr. Howitt, having no Medium at hand to settle
this difference and reveal the right name of the seer, calls him by
both names), who merely "beheld all the essential natures of things,
saw the interior of men and animals, as perfectly as their exterior;
and described them in language so correct, that the most able
technologists could not surpass him.  He pointed out the proper
remedies for all the complaints, and the shops where they were to be
obtained";--in the latter respect appearing to hail from an
advertising circle, as we conceive.  It was also in this gentleman's
limited department to "see the metals in the earth", and to have
"the most distant regions and their various productions present
before him".  Having despatched this tough case, the believer will
pass on to Thomas L. Harris, and will swallow HIM easily, together
with "whole epics" of his composition; a certain work "of scarcely
less than Miltonic grandeur", called The Lyric of the Golden Age--a
lyric pretty nigh as long as one of Mr. Howitt's volumes--dictated
by Mr. (not Mrs.) Harris to the publisher in ninety-four hours; and
several extempore sermons, possessing the remarkably lucid property
of being "full, unforced, out-gushing, unstinted, and absorbing".
The candidate for examination in pure belief, will then pass on to
the spirit-photography department; this, again, will be found in so-
favoured America, under the superintendence of Medium Mumler, a
photographer of Boston:  who was "astonished" (though, on Mr.
Howitt's showing, he surely ought not to have been) "on taking a
photograph of himself, to find also by his side the figure of a
young girl, which he immediately recognised as that of a deceased
relative.  The circumstance made a great excitement.  Numbers of
persons rushed to his rooms, and many have found deceased friends
photographed with themselves."  (Perhaps Mr. Mumler, too, may become
"endowed with competence" in time.  Who knows?)  Finally, the true
believers in the gospel according to Howitt, have, besides, but to
pin their faith on "ladies who see spirits habitually", on ladies
who KNOW they have a tendency to soar in the air on sufficient
provocation, and on a few other gnats to be taken after their
camels, and they shall be pronounced by Mr. Howitt not of the
stereotyped class of minds, and not partakers of "the astonishing
ignorance of the press", and shall receive a first-class certificate
of merit.

But before they pass through this portal into the Temple of Serene
Wisdom, we, halting blind and helpless on the steps, beg to suggest
to them what they must at once and for ever disbelieve.  They must
disbelieve that in the dark times, when very few were versed in what
are now the mere recreations of Science, and when those few formed a
priesthood-class apart, any marvels were wrought by the aid of
concave mirrors and a knowledge of the properties of certain odours
and gases, although the self-same marvels could be reproduced before
their eyes at the Polytechnic Institution, Regent Street, London,
any day in the year.  They must by no means believe that Conjuring
and Ventriloquism are old trades.  They must disbelieve all
Philosophical Transactions containing the records of painful and
careful inquiry into now familiar disorders of the senses of seeing
and hearing, and into the wonders of somnambulism, epilepsy,
hysteria, miasmatic influence, vegetable poisons derived by whole
communities from corrupted air, diseased imitation, and moral
infection.  They must disbelieve all such awkward leading cases as
the case of the Woodstock Commissioners and their man, and the case
of the Identity of the Stockwell Ghost, with the maid-servant.  They
must disbelieve the vanishing of champion haunted houses (except,
indeed, out of Mr. Howitt's book), represented to have been closed
and ruined for years, before one day's inquiry by four gentlemen
associated with this journal, and one hour's reference to the Local
Rate-books.  They must disbelieve all possibility of a human
creature on the last verge of the dark bridge from Life to Death,
being mysteriously able, in occasional cases, so to influence the
mind of one very near and dear, as vividly to impress that mind with
some disturbed sense of the solemn change impending.  They must
disbelieve the possibility of the lawful existence of a class of
intellects which, humbly conscious of the illimitable power of GOD
and of their own weakness and ignorance, never deny that He can
cause the souls of the dead to revisit the earth, or that He may
have caused the souls of the dead to revisit the earth, or that He
can cause any awful or wondrous thing to be; but to deny the
likelihood of apparitions or spirits coming here upon the stupidest
of bootless errands, and producing credentials tantamount to a
solicitation of our vote and interest and next proxy, to get them
into the Asylum for Idiots.  They must disbelieve the right of
Christian people who do NOT protest against Protestantism, but who
hold it to be a barrier against the darkest superstitions that can
enslave the soul, to guard with jealousy all approaches tending down
to Cock Lane Ghosts and suchlike infamous swindles, widely degrading
when widely believed in; and they must disbelieve that such people
have the right to know, and that it is their duty to know, wonder-
workers by their fruits, and to test miracle-mongers by the tests of
probability, analogy, and common sense.  They must disbelieve all
rational explanations of thoroughly proved experiences (only) which
appear supernatural, derived from the average experience and study
of the visible world.  They must disbelieve the speciality of the
Master and the Disciples, and that it is a monstrosity to test the
wonders of show-folk by the same touchstone.  Lastly, they must
disbelieve that one of the best accredited chapters in the history
of mankind is the chapter that records the astonishing deceits
continually practised, with no object or purpose but the distorted
pleasure of deceiving.

We have summed up a few--not nearly all--of the articles of belief
and disbelief to which Mr. Howitt most arrogantly demands an
implicit adherence.  To uphold these, he uses a book as a Clown in a
Pantomime does, and knocks everybody on the head with it who comes
in his way.  Moreover, he is an angrier personage than the Clown,
and does not experimentally try the effect of his red-hot poker on
your shins, but straightway runs you through the body and soul with
it.  He is always raging to tell you that if you are not Howitt, you
are Atheist and Anti-Christ.  He is the sans-culotte of the
Spiritual Revolution, and will not hear of your accepting this point
and rejecting that;--down your throat with them all, one and
indivisible, at the point of the pike; No Liberty, Totality,
Fraternity, or Death!

Without presuming to question that "it is high time to protest
against Protestantism" on such very substantial grounds as Mr.
Howitt sets forth, we do presume to think that it is high time to
protest against Mr. Howitt's spiritualism, as being a little in
excess of the peculiar merit of Thomas L. Harris's sermons, and
somewhat TOO "full, out-gushing, unstinted, and absorbing".



THE MARTYR MEDIUM



"After the valets, the master!" is Mr. Fechter's rallying cry in the
picturesque romantic drama which attracts all London to the Lyceum
Theatre.  After the worshippers and puffers of Mr. Daniel Dunglas
Home, the spirit medium, comes Mr. Daniel Dunglas Home himself, in
one volume.  And we must, for the honour of Literature, plainly
express our great surprise and regret that he comes arm-in-arm with
such good company as Messrs. Longman and Company.

We have already summed up Mr. Home's demands on the public capacity
of swallowing, as sounded through the war-denouncing trumpet of Mr.
Howitt, and it is not our intention to revive the strain as
performed by Mr. Home on his own melodious instrument.  We notice,
by the way, that in that part of the Fantasia where the hand of the
first Napoleon is supposed to be reproduced, recognised, and kissed,
at the Tuileries, Mr. Home subdues the florid effects one might have
expected after Mr. Howitt's execution, and brays in an extremely
general manner.  And yet we observe Mr. Home to be in other things
very reliant on Mr. Howitt, of whom he entertains as gratifying an
opinion as Mr. Howitt entertains of him:  dwelling on his "deep
researches into this subject", and of his "great work now ready for
the press", and of his "eloquent and forcible" advocacy, and eke of
his "elaborate and almost exhaustive work", which Mr. Home trusts
will be "extensively read".  But, indeed, it would seem to be the
most reliable characteristic of the Dear Spirits, though very
capricious in other particulars, that they always form their circles
into what may be described, in worldly terms, as A Mutual Admiration
and Complimentation Company (Limited).

Mr. Home's book is entitled Incidents in My Life.  We will extract a
dozen sample passages from it, as variations on and phrases of
harmony in, the general strain for the Trumpet, which we have
promised not to repeat.


1.  MR. HOME IS SUPERNATURALLY NURSED


"I cannot remember when first I became subject to the curious
phenomena which have now for so long attended me, but my aunt and
others have told me that when I was a baby my cradle was frequently
rocked, as if some kind guardian spirit was attending me in my
slumbers."


2.  DISRESPECTFUL CONDUCT OF MR. HOME'S AUNT NEVERTHELESS


"In her uncontrollable anger she seized a chair and threw it at me."


3.  PUNISHMENT OF MR. HOME'S AUNT


"Upon one occasion as the table was being thus moved about of
itself, my aunt brought the family Bible, and placing it on the
table, said, 'There, that will soon drive the devils away'; but to
her astonishment the table only moved in a more lively manner, as if
pleased to bear such a burden."  (We believe this is constantly
observed in pulpits and church reading desks, which are invariably
lively.)  "Seeing this she was greatly incensed, and determined to
stop it, she angrily placed her whole weight on the table, and was
actually lifted up with it bodily from the floor."


4. TRIUMPHANT EFFECT OF THIS DISCIPLINE ON MR. HOME'S AUNT


"And she felt it a duty that I should leave her house, and which I
did."


5.  MR. HOME'S MISSION


It was communicated to him by the spirit of his mother, in the
following terms:  "Daniel, fear not, my child, God is with you, and
who shall be against you?  Seek to do good:  be truthful and truth-
loving, and you will prosper, my child.  Yours is a glorious
mission--you will convince the infidel, cure the sick, and console
the weeping."  It is a coincidence that another eminent man, with
several missions, heard a voice from the Heavens blessing him, when
he also was a youth, and saying, "You will be rewarded, my son, in
time".  This Medium was the celebrated Baron Munchausen, who relates
the experience in the opening of the second chapter of the incidents
in HIS life.


6.  MODEST SUCCESS OF MR. HOME'S MISSION


"Certainly these phenomena, whether from God or from the devil, have
in ten years caused more converts to the great truths of immortality
and angel communion, with all that flows from these great facts,
than all the sects in Christendom have made during the same period."


7.  WHAT THE FIRST COMPOSERS SAY OF THE SPIRIT-MUSIC, TO MR. HOME


"As to the music, it has been my good fortune to be on intimate
terms with some of the first composers of the day, and more than one
of them have said of such as they have heard, that it is such music
as only angels could make, and no man could write it."

These "first composers" are not more particularly named.  We shall
therefore be happy to receive and file at the office of this
Journal, the testimonials in the foregoing terms of Dr. Sterndale
Bennett, Mr. Balfe, Mr. Macfarren, Mr. Benedict, Mr. Vincent
Wallace, Signor Costa, M. Auber, M. Gounod, Signor Rossini, and
Signor Verdi.  We shall also feel obliged to Mr. Alfred Mellon, who
is no doubt constantly studying this wonderful music, under the
Medium's auspices, if he will note on paper, from memory, say a
single sheet of the same.  Signor Giulio Regondi will then perform
it, as correctly as a mere mortal can, on the Accordion, at the next
ensuing concert of the Philharmonic Society; on which occasion the
before-mentioned testimonials will be conspicuously displayed in the
front of the orchestra.


8.  MR. HOME'S MIRACULOUS INFANT


"On the 26th April, old style, or 8th May, according to our style,
at seven in the evening, and as the snow was fast falling, our
little boy was born at the town house, situate on the Gagarines
Quay, in St. Petersburg, where we were still staying.  A few hours
after his birth, his mother, the nurse, and I heard for several
hours the warbling of a bird as if singing over him.  Also that
night, and for two or three nights afterwards, a bright starlike
light, which was clearly visible from the partial darkness of the
room, in which there was only a night-lamp burning, appeared several
times directly I over its head, where it remained for some moments,
and then slowly moved in the direction of the door, where it
disappeared.  This was also seen by each of us at the same time.
The light was more condensed than those which have been so often
seen in my presence upon previous and subsequent occasions.  It was
brighter and more distinctly globular.  I do not believe that it
came through my mediumship, but rather through that of the child,
who has manifested on several occasions the presence of the gift.  I
do not like to allude to such a matter, but as there are more
strange things in Heaven and earth than are dreamt of, even in my
philosophy, I do not feel myself at liberty to omit stating, that
during the latter part of my wife's pregnancy, we thought it better
that she should not join in Seances, because it was found that
whenever the rappings occurred in the room, a simultaneous movement
of the child was distinctly felt, perfectly in unison with the
sounds.  When there were three sounds, three movements were felt,
and so on, and when five sounds were heard, which is generally the
call for the alphabet, she felt the five internal movements, and she
would frequently, when we were mistaken in the latter, correct us
from what the child indicated."

We should ask pardon of our readers for sullying our paper with this
nauseous matter, if without it they could adequately understand what
Mr. Home's book is.


9.  CAGLIOSTRO'S SPIRIT CALLS ON MR. HOME


Prudently avoiding the disagreeable question of his giving himself,
both in this state of existence and in his spiritual circle, a name
to which he never had any pretensions whatever, and likewise
prudently suppressing any reference to his amiable weakness as a
swindler and an infamous trafficker in his own wife, the guileless
Mr. Balsamo delivered, in a "distinct voice", this distinct
celestial utterance--unquestionably punctuated in a supernatural
manner:  "My power was that of a mesmerist, but all-misunderstood by
those about me, my biographers have even done me injustice, but I
care not for the untruths of earth".


10.  ORACULAR STATE OF MR. HOME


"After various manifestations, Mr. Home went into the trance, and
addressing a person present, said, 'You ask what good are such
trivial manifestations, such as rapping, table-moving, etc.?  God is
a better judge than we are what is fitted for humanity, immense
results may spring from trivial things.  The steam from a kettle is
a small thing, but look at the locomotive!  The electric spark from
the back of a cat is a small thing, but see the wonders of
electricity!  The raps are small things, but their results will lead
you to the Spirit-World, and to eternity!  Why should great results
spring from such small causes?  Christ was born in a manger, he was
not born a King.  When you tell me why he was born in a manger, I
will tell you why these manifestations, so trivial, so undignified
as they appear to you, have been appointed to convince the world of
the truth of spiritualism.'"

Wonderful!  Clearly direct Inspiration!--And yet, perhaps, hardly
worth the trouble of going "into the trance" for, either.  Amazing
as the revelation is, we seem to have heard something like it from
more than one personage who was wide awake.  A quack doctor, in an
open barouche (attended by a barrel-organ and two footmen in brass
helmets), delivered just such another address within our hearing,
outside a gate of Paris, not two months ago.


11.  THE TESTIMONY OF MR. HOME'S BOOTS


"The lady of the house turned to me and said abruptly, 'Why, you are
sitting in the air'; and on looking, we found that the chair
remained in its place, but that I was elevated two or three inches
above it, and my feet not touching the floor.  This may show how
utterly unconscious I am at times to the sensation of levitation.
As is usual, when I had not got above the level of the heads of
those about me, and when they change their position much--as they
frequently do in looking wistfully at such a phenomenon--I came down
again, but not till I had remained so raised about half a minute
from the time of its being first seen.  I was now impressed to leave
the table, and was soon carried to the lofty ceiling.  The Count de
B- left his place at the table, and coming under where I was, said,
'Now, young Home, come and let me touch your feet.'  I told him I
had no volition in the matter, but perhaps the spirits would kindly
allow me to come down to him.  They did so, by floating me down to
him, and my feet were soon in his outstretched hands.  He seized my
boots, and now I was again elevated, he holding tightly, and pulling
at my feet, till the boots I wore, which had elastic sides, came off
and remained in his hands."


12.  THE UNCOMBATIVE NATURE OF MR. HOME


As there is a maudlin complaint in this book, about men of Science
being hard upon "the 'Orphan' Home", and as the "gentle and
uncombative nature" of this Medium in a martyred point of view is
pathetically commented on by the anonymous literary friend who
supplies him with an introduction and appendix--rather at odds with
Mr. Howitt, who is so mightily triumphant about the same Martyr's
reception by crowned heads, and about the competence he has become
endowed with--we cull from Mr. Home's book one or two little
illustrative flowers.  Sir David Brewster (a pestilent unbeliever)
"has come before the public in few matters which have brought more
shame upon him than his conduct and assertions on this occasion, in
which he manifested not only a disregard for truth, but also a
disloyalty to scientific observation, and to the use of his own
eyesight and natural faculties".  The same unhappy Sir David
Brewster's "character may be the better known, not only for his
untruthful dealing with this subject, but also in his own domain of
science in which the same unfaithfulness to truth will be seen to be
the characteristic of his mind".  Again, he "is really not a man
over whom victory is any honour".  Again, "not only he, but
Professor Faraday have had time and ample leisure to regret that
they should have so foolishly pledged themselves", etc.  A Faraday a
fool in the sight of a Home!  That unjust judge and whited wall,
Lord Brougham, has his share of this Martyr Medium's
uncombativeness.  "In order that he might not be compelled to deny
Sir David's statements, he found it necessary that he should be
silent, and I have some reason to complain that his Lordship
preferred sacrificing me to his desire not to immolate his friend."
M. Arago also came off with very doubtful honours from a wrestle
with the uncombative Martyr; who is perfectly clear (and so are we,
let us add) that scientific men are not the men for his purpose.  Of
course, he is the butt of "utter and acknowledged ignorance", and of
"the most gross and foolish statements", and of "the unjust and
dishonest", and of "the press-gang", and of crowds of other alien
and combative adjectives, participles, and substantives.

Nothing is without its use, and even this odious book may do some
service.  Not because it coolly claims for the writer and his
disciples such powers as were wielded by the Saviour and the
Apostles; not because it sees no difference between twelve table
rappers in these days, and "twelve fishermen" in those; not because
it appeals for precedents to statements extracted from the most
ignorant and wretched of mankind, by cruel torture, and constantly
withdrawn when the torture was withdrawn; not because it sets forth
such a strange confusion of ideas as is presented by one of the
faithful when, writing of a certain sprig of geranium handed by an
invisible hand, he adds in ecstasies, "WHICH WE HAVE PLANTED AND IT
IS GROWING, SO THAT IT IS NO DELUSION, NO FAIRY MONEY TURNED INTO
DROSS OR LEAVES"--as if it followed that the conjuror's half-crowns
really did become invisible and in that state fly, because he
afterwards cuts them out of a real orange; or as if the conjuror's
pigeon, being after the discharge of his gun, a real live pigeon
fluttering on the target, must therefore conclusively be a pigeon,
fired, whole, living and unshattered, out of the gun!--not because
of the exposure of any of these weaknesses, or a thousand such, are
these moving incidents in the life of the Martyr Medium, and similar
productions, likely to prove useful, but because of their uniform
abuse of those who go to test the reality of these alleged
phenomena, and who come away incredulous.  There is an old homely
proverb concerning pitch and its adhesive character, which we hope
this significant circumstance may impress on many minds.  The writer
of these lines has lately heard overmuch touching young men of
promise in the imaginative arts, "towards whom" Martyr Mediums
assisting at evening parties feel themselves "drawn".  It may be a
hint to such young men to stick to their own drawing, as being of a
much better kind, and to leave Martyr Mediums alone in their glory.

As there is a good deal in these books about "lying spirits", we
will conclude by putting a hypothetical case.  Supposing that a
Medium (Martyr or otherwise) were established for a time in the
house of an English gentleman abroad; say, somewhere in Italy.
Supposing that the more marvellous the Medium became, the more
suspicious of him the lady of the house became.  Supposing that the
lady, her distrust once aroused, were particularly struck by the
Medium's exhibiting a persistent desire to commit her, somehow or
other, to the disclosure of the manner of the death, to him unknown,
of a certain person.  Supposing that she at length resolved to test
the Medium on this head, and, therefore, on a certain evening
mentioned a wholly supposititious manner of death (which was not the
real manner of death, nor anything at all like it) within the range
of his listening ears.  And supposing that a spirit presently
afterwards rapped out its presence, claiming to be the spirit of
that deceased person, and claiming to have departed this life in
that supposititious way.  Would that be a lying spirit?  Or would it
he a something else, tainting all that Medium's statements and
suppressions, even if they were not in themselves of a manifestly
outrageous character?



THE LATE MR. STANFIELD



Every Artist, be he writer, painter, musician, or actor, must bear
his private sorrows as he best can, and must separate them from the
exercise of his public pursuit.  But it sometimes happens, in
compensation, that his private loss of a dear friend represents a
loss on the part of the whole community.  Then he may, without
obtrusion of his individuality, step forth to lay his little wreath
upon that dear friend's grave.

On Saturday, the eighteenth of this present month, Clarkson
Stanfield died.  On the afternoon of that day, England lost the
great marine painter of whom she will be boastful ages hence; the
National Historian of her speciality, the Sea; the man famous in all
countries for his marvellous rendering of the waves that break upon
her shores, of her ships and seamen, of her coasts and skies, of her
storms and sunshine, of the many marvels of the deep.  He who holds
the oceans in the hollow of His hand had given, associated with
them, wonderful gifts into his keeping; he had used them well
through threescore and fourteen years; and, on the afternoon of that
spring day, relinquished them for ever.

It is superfluous to record that the painter of "The Battle of
Trafalgar", of the "Victory being towed into Gibraltar with the body
of Nelson on Board", of "The Morning after the Wreck", of "The
Abandoned", of fifty more such works, died in his seventy-fourth
year, "Mr." Stanfield.--He was an Englishman.

Those grand pictures will proclaim his powers while paint and canvas
last.  But the writer of these words had been his friend for thirty
years; and when, a short week or two before his death, he laid that
once so skilful hand upon the writer's breast and told him they
would meet again, "but not here", the thoughts of the latter turned,
for the time, so little to his noble genius, and so much to his
noble nature!

He was the soul of frankness, generosity, and simplicity.  The most
genial, the most affectionate, the most loving, and the most lovable
of men.  Success had never for an instant spoiled him.  His interest
in the Theatre as an Institution--the best picturesqueness of which
may be said to be wholly due to him--was faithful to the last.  His
belief in a Play, his delight in one, the ease with which it moved
him to tears or to laughter, were most remarkable evidences of the
heart he must have put into his old theatrical work, and of the
thorough purpose and sincerity with which it must have been done.
The writer was very intimately associated with him in some amateur
plays; and day after day, and night after night, there were the same
unquenchable freshness, enthusiasm, and impressibility in him,
though broken in health, even then.

No Artist can ever have stood by his art with a quieter dignity than
he always did.  Nothing would have induced him to lay it at the feet
of any human creature.  To fawn, or to toady, or to do undeserved
homage to any one, was an absolute impossibility with him.  And yet
his character was so nicely balanced that he was the last man in the
world to be suspected of self-assertion, and his modesty was one of
his most special qualities.

He was a charitable, religious, gentle, truly good man.  A genuine
man, incapable of pretence or of concealment.  He had been a sailor
once; and all the best characteristics that are popularly attributed
to sailors, being his, and being in him refined by the influences of
his Art, formed a whole not likely to be often seen.  There is no
smile that the writer can recall, like his; no manner so naturally
confiding and so cheerfully engaging.  When the writer saw him for
the last time on earth, the smile and the manner shone out once
through the weakness, still:  the bright unchanging Soul within the
altered face and form.

No man was ever held in higher respect by his friends, and yet his
intimate friends invariably addressed him and spoke of him by a pet
name.  It may need, perhaps, the writer's memory and associations to
find in this a touching expression of his winning character, his
playful smile, and pleasant ways.  "You know Mrs. Inchbald's story,
Nature and Art?" wrote Thomas Hood, once, in a letter:  "What a fine
Edition of Nature and Art is Stanfield!"

Gone!  And many and many a dear old day gone with him!  But their
memories remain.  And his memory will not soon fade out, for he has
set his mark upon the restless waters, and his fame will long be
sounded in the roar of the sea.



A SLIGHT QUESTION OF FACT



It is never well for the public interest that the originator of any
social reform should be soon forgotten.  Further, it is neither
wholesome nor right (being neither generous nor just) that the merit
of his work should be gradually transferred elsewhere.

Some few weeks ago, our contemporary, the Pall Mall Gazette, in
certain strictures on our Theatres which we are very far indeed from
challenging, remarked on the first effectual discouragement of an
outrage upon decency which the lobbies and upper-boxes of even our
best Theatres habitually paraded within the last twenty or thirty
years.  From those remarks it might appear as though no such Manager
of Covent Garden or Drury Lane as Mr. Macready had ever existed.

It is a fact beyond all possibility of question, that Mr. Macready,
on assuming the management of Covent Garden Theatre in 1837, did
instantly set himself, regardless of precedent and custom down to
that hour obtaining, rigidly to suppress this shameful thing, and
did rigidly suppress and crush it during his whole management of
that theatre, and during his whole subsequent management of Drury
Lane.  That he did so, as certainly without favour as without fear;
that he did so, against his own immediate interests; that he did so,
against vexations and oppositions which might have cooled the ardour
of a less earnest man, or a less devoted artist; can be better known
to no one than the writer of the present words, whose name stands at
the head of these pages.



LANDOR'S LIFE



Prefixed to the second volume of Mr. Forster's admirable biography
of Walter Savage Landor, {1} is an engraving from a portrait of that
remarkable man when seventy-seven years of age, by Boxall.  The
writer of these lines can testify that the original picture is a
singularly good likeness, the result of close and subtle observation
on the part of the painter; but, for this very reason, the engraving
gives a most inadequate idea of the merit of the picture and the
character of the man.

From the engraving, the arms and hands are omitted.  In the picture,
they are, as they were in nature, indispensable to a correct reading
of the vigorous face.  The arms were very peculiar.  They were
rather short, and were curiously restrained and checked in their
action at the elbows; in the action of the hands, even when
separately clenched, there was the same kind of pause, and a
noticeable tendency to relaxation on the part of the thumb.  Let the
face be never so intense or fierce, there was a commentary of
gentleness in the hands, essential to be taken along with it.  Like
Hamlet, Landor would speak daggers, but use none.  In the expression
of his hands, though angrily closed, there was always gentleness and
tenderness; just as when they were open, and the handsome old
gentleman would wave them with a little courtly flourish that sat
well upon him, as he recalled some classic compliment that he had
rendered to some reigning Beauty, there was a chivalrous grace about
them such as pervades his softer verses.  Thus the fictitious Mr.
Boythorn (to whom we may refer without impropriety in this
connexion, as Mr. Forster does) declaims "with unimaginable energy"
the while his bird is "perched upon his thumb", and he "softly
smooths its feathers with his forefinger".

From the spirit of Mr. Forster's Biography these characteristic
hands are never omitted, and hence (apart from its literary merits)
its great value.  As the same masterly writer's Life and Times of
Oliver Goldsmith is a generous and yet conscientious picture of a
period, so this is a not less generous and yet conscientious picture
of one life; of a life, with all its aspirations, achievements, and
disappointments; all its capabilities, opportunities, and
irretrievable mistakes.  It is essentially a sad book, and herein
lies proof of its truth and worth.  The life of almost any man
possessing great gifts, would be a sad book to himself; and this
book enables us not only to see its subject, but to be its subject,
if we will.

Mr. Forster is of opinion that "Landor's fame very surely awaits
him".  This point admitted or doubted, the value of the book remains
the same.  It needs not to know his works (otherwise than through
his biographer's exposition), it needs not to have known himself, to
find a deep interest in these pages.  More or less of their warning
is in every conscience; and some admiration of a fine genius, and of
a great, wild, generous nature, incapable of mean self-extenuation
or dissimulation--if unhappily incapable of self-repression too--
should be in every breast.  "There may be still living many
persons", Walter Landor's brother, Robert, writes to Mr. Forster of
this book, "who would contradict any narrative of yours in which the
best qualities were remembered, the worst forgotten."  Mr. Forster's
comment is:  "I had not waited for this appeal to resolve, that, if
this memoir were written at all, it should contain, as far as might
lie within my power, a fair statement of the truth".  And this
eloquent passage of truth immediately follows:  "Few of his
infirmities are without something kindly or generous about them; and
we are not long in discovering there is nothing so wildly incredible
that he will not himself in perfect good faith believe.  When he
published his first book of poems on quitting Oxford, the profits
were to be reserved for a distressed clergyman.  When he published
his Latin poems, the poor of Leipzig were to have the sum they
realised.  When his comedy was ready to be acted, a Spaniard who had
sheltered him at Castro was to be made richer by it.  When he
competed for the prize of the Academy of Stockholm, it was to go to
the poor of Sweden.  If nobody got anything from any one of these
enterprises, the fault at all events was not his.  With his
extraordinary power of forgetting disappointments, he was prepared
at each successive failure to start afresh, as if each had been a
triumph.  I shall have to delineate this peculiarity as strongly in
the last half as in the first half of his life, and it was certainly
an amiable one.  He was ready at all times to set aside, out of his
own possessions, something for somebody who might please him for the
time; and when frailties of temper and tongue are noted, this other
eccentricity should not be omitted.  He desired eagerly the love as
well as the good opinion of those whom for the time he esteemed, and
no one was more affectionate while under such influences.  It is not
a small virtue to feel such genuine pleasure, as he always did in
giving and receiving pleasure.  His generosity, too, was bestowed
chiefly on those who could make small acknowledgment in thanks and
no return in kind."

Some of his earlier contemporaries may have thought him a vain man.
Most assuredly he was not, in the common acceptation of the term.  A
vain man has little or no admiration to bestow upon competitors.
Landor had an inexhaustible fund.  He thought well of his writings,
or he would not have preserved them.  He said and wrote that he
thought well of them, because that was his mind about them, and he
said and wrote his mind.  He was one of the few men of whom you
might always know the whole:  of whom you might always know the
worst, as well as the best.  He had no reservations or duplicities.
"No, by Heaven!" he would say ("with unimaginable energy"), if any
good adjective were coupled with him which he did not deserve:  "I
am nothing of the kind.  I wish I were; but I don't deserve the
attribute, and I never did, and I never shall!"  His intense
consciousness of himself never led to his poorly excusing himself,
and seldom to his violently asserting himself.  When he told some
little story of his bygone social experiences, in Florence, or where
not, as he was fond of doing, it took the innocent form of making
all the interlocutors, Landors.  It was observable, too, that they
always called him "Mr. Landor"--rather ceremoniously and
submissively.  There was a certain "Caro Pedre Abete Marina"--
invariably so addressed in these anecdotes--who figured through a
great many of them, and who always expressed himself in this
deferential tone.

Mr. Forster writes of Landor's character thus:


"A man must be judged, at first, by what he says and does.  But with
him such extravagance as I have referred to was little more than the
habitual indulgence (on such themes) of passionate feelings and
language, indecent indeed but utterly purposeless; the mere
explosion of wrath provoked by tyranny or cruelty; the
irregularities of an overheated steam-engine too weak for its own
vapour.  It is very certain that no one could detest oppression more
truly than Landor did in all seasons and times; and if no one
expressed that scorn, that abhorrence of tyranny and fraud, more
hastily or more intemperately, all his fire and fury signified
really little else than ill-temper too easily provoked.  Not to
justify or excuse such language, but to explain it, this
consideration is urged.  If not uniformly placable, Landor was
always compassionate.  He was tender-hearted rather than bloody-
minded at all times, and upon only the most partial acquaintance
with his writings could other opinion be formed.  A completer
knowledge of them would satisfy any one that he had as little real
disposition to kill a king as to kill a mouse.  In fact there is not
a more marked peculiarity in his genius than the union with its
strength of a most uncommon gentleness, and in the personal ways of
the man this was equally manifest."--Vol. i. p. 496.


Of his works, thus:


"Though his mind was cast in the antique mould, it had opened itself
to every kind of impression through a long and varied life; he has
written with equal excellence in both poetry and prose, which can
hardly be said of any of his contemporaries; and perhaps the single
epithet by which his books would be best described is that reserved
exclusively for books not characterised only by genius, but also by
special individuality.  They are unique.  Having possessed them, we
should miss them.  Their place would be supplied by no others.  They
have that about them, moreover, which renders it almost certain that
they will frequently be resorted to in future time.  There are none
in the language more quotable.  Even where impulsiveness and want of
patience have left them most fragmentary, this rich compensation is
offered to the reader.  There is hardly a conceivable subject, in
life or literature, which they do not illustrate by striking
aphorisms, by concise and profound observations, by wisdom ever
applicable to the deeds of men, and by wit as available for their
enjoyment.  Nor, above all, will there anywhere be found a more
pervading passion for liberty, a fiercer hatred of the base, a wider
sympathy with the wronged and the oppressed, or help more ready at
all times for those who fight at odds and disadvantage against the
powerful and the fortunate, than in the writings of Walter Savage
Landor."--Last page of second volume.


The impression was strong upon the present writer's mind, as on Mr.
Forster's, during years of close friendship with the subject of this
biography, that his animosities were chiefly referable to the
singular inability in him to dissociate other people's ways of
thinking from his own.  He had, to the last, a ludicrous grievance
(both Mr. Forster and the writer have often amused themselves with
it) against a good-natured nobleman, doubtless perfectly unconscious
of having ever given him offence.  The offence was, that on the
occasion of some dinner party in another nobleman's house, many
years before, this innocent lord (then a commoner) had passed in to
dinner, through some door, before him, as he himself was about to
pass in through that same door with a lady on his arm.  Now, Landor
was a gentleman of most scrupulous politeness, and in his carriage
of himself towards ladies there was a certain mixture of stateliness
and deference, belonging to quite another time, and, as Mr. Pepys
would observe, "mighty pretty to see".  If he could by any effort
imagine himself committing such a high crime and misdemeanour as
that in question, he could only imagine himself as doing it of a set
purpose, under the sting of some vast injury, to inflict a great
affront.  A deliberately designed affront on the part of another
man, it therefore remained to the end of his days.  The manner in
which, as time went on, he permeated the unfortunate lord's ancestry
with this offence, was whimsically characteristic of Landor.  The
writer remembers very well when only the individual himself was held
responsible in the story for the breach of good breeding; but in
another ten years or so, it began to appear that his father had
always been remarkable for ill manners; and in yet another ten years
or so, his grandfather developed into quite a prodigy of coarse
behaviour.

Mr. Boythorn--if he may again be quoted--said of his adversary, Sir
Leicester Dedlock:  "That fellow is, AND HIS FATHER WAS, AND HIS
GRANDFATHER WAS, the most stiff-necked, arrogant, imbecile, pig-
headed numskull, ever, by some inexplicable mistake of Nature, born
in any station of life but a walking-stick's!"

The strength of some of Mr. Landor's most captivating kind qualities
was traceable to the same source.  Knowing how keenly he himself
would feel the being at any small social disadvantage, or the being
unconsciously placed in any ridiculous light, he was wonderfully
considerate of shy people, or of such as might be below the level of
his usual conversation, or otherwise out of their element.  The
writer once observed him in the keenest distress of mind in behalf
of a modest young stranger who came into a drawing-room with a glove
on his head.  An expressive commentary on this sympathetic
condition, and on the delicacy with which he advanced to the young
stranger's rescue, was afterwards furnished by himself at a friendly
dinner at Gore House, when it was the most delightful of houses.
His dress--say, his cravat or shirt-collar--had become slightly
disarranged on a hot evening, and Count D'Orsay laughingly called
his attention to the circumstance as we rose from table.  Landor
became flushed, and greatly agitated:  "My dear Count D'Orsay, I
thank you!  My dear Count D'Orsay, I thank you from my soul for
pointing out to me the abominable condition to which I am reduced!
If I had entered the Drawing-room, and presented myself before Lady
Blessington in so absurd a light, I would have instantly gone home,
put a pistol to my head, and blown my brains out!"

Mr. Forster tells a similar story of his keeping a company waiting
dinner, through losing his way; and of his seeing no remedy for that
breach of politeness but cutting his throat, or drowning himself,
unless a countryman whom he met could direct him by a short road to
the house where the party were assembled.  Surely these are
expressive notes on the gravity and reality of his explosive
inclinations to kill kings!

His manner towards boys was charming, and the earnestness of his
wish to be on equal terms with them and to win their confidence was
quite touching.  Few, reading Mr. Forster's book, can fall to see in
this, his pensive remembrance of that "studious wilful boy at once
shy and impetuous", who had not many intimacies at Rugby, but who
was "generally popular and respected, and used his influence often
to save the younger boys from undue harshness or violence".  The
impulsive yearnings of his passionate heart towards his own boy, on
their meeting at Bath, after years of separation, likewise burn
through this phase of his character.

But a more spiritual, softened, and unselfish aspect of it, was to
derived from his respectful belief in happiness which he himself had
missed.  His marriage had not been a felicitous one--it may be
fairly assumed for either side--but no trace of bitterness or
distrust concerning other marriages was in his mind.  He was never
more serene than in the midst of a domestic circle, and was
invariably remarkable for a perfectly benignant interest in young
couples and young lovers.  That, in his ever-fresh fancy, he
conceived in this association innumerable histories of himself
involving far more unlikely events that never happened than Isaac
D'Israeli ever imagined, is hardly to be doubted; but as to this
part of his real history he was mute, or revealed his nobleness in
an impulse to be generously just.  We verge on delicate ground, but
a slight remembrance rises in the writer which can grate nowhere.
Mr. Forster relates how a certain friend, being in Florence, sent
him home a leaf from the garden of his old house at Fiesole.  That
friend had first asked him what he should send him home, and he had
stipulated for this gift--found by Mr. Forster among his papers
after his death.  The friend, on coming back to England, related to
Landor that he had been much embarrassed, on going in search of the
leaf, by his driver's suddenly stopping his horses in a narrow lane,
and presenting him (the friend) to "La Signora Landora".  The lady
was walking alone on a bright Italian-winter-day; and the man,
having been told to drive to the Villa Landora, inferred that he
must be conveying a guest or visitor.  "I pulled off my hat," said
the friend, "apologised for the coachman's mistake, and drove on.
The lady was walking with a rapid and firm step, had bright eyes, a
fine fresh colour, and looked animated and agreeable."  Landor
checked off each clause of the description, with a stately nod of
more than ready assent, and replied, with all his tremendous energy
concentrated into the sentence:  "And the Lord forbid that I should
do otherwise than declare that she always WAS agreeable--to every
one but ME!"

Mr. Forster step by step builds up the evidence on which he writes
this life and states this character.  In like manner, he gives the
evidence for his high estimation of Landor's works, and--it may be
added--for their recompense against some neglect, in finding so
sympathetic, acute, and devoted a champion.  Nothing in the book is
more remarkable than his examination of each of Landor's successive
pieces of writing, his delicate discernment of their beauties, and
his strong desire to impart his own perceptions in this wise to the
great audience that is yet to come.  It rarely befalls an author to
have such a commentator:  to become the subject of so much artistic
skill and knowledge, combined with such infinite and loving pains.
Alike as a piece of Biography, and as a commentary upon the beauties
of a great writer, the book is a massive book; as the man and the
writer were massive too.  Sometimes, when the balance held by Mr.
Forster has seemed for a moment to turn a little heavily against the
infirmities of temperament of a grand old friend, we have felt
something of a shock; but we have not once been able to gainsay the
justice of the scales.  This feeling, too, has only fluttered out of
the detail, here or there, and has vanished before the whole.  We
fully agree with Mr. Forster that "judgment has been passed"--as it
should be--"with an equal desire to be only just on all the
qualities of his temperament which affected necessarily not his own
life only.  But, now that the story is told, no one will have
difficulty in striking the balance between its good and ill; and
what was really imperishable in Landor's genius will not be
treasured less, or less understood, for the more perfect knowledge
of his character".

Mr. Forster's second volume gives a facsimile of Landor's writing at
seventy-five.  It may be interesting to those who are curious in
calligraphy, to know that its resemblance to the recent handwriting
of that great genius, M. Victor Hugo, is singularly strong.

In a military burial-ground in India, the name of Walter Landor is
associated with the present writer's over the grave of a young
officer.  No name could stand there, more inseparably associated in
the writer's mind with the dignity of generosity:  with a noble
scorn of all littleness, all cruelty, oppression, fraud, and false
pretence.



ADDRESS WHICH APPEARED SHORTLY PREVIOUS TO THE COMPLETION OF THE
TWENTIETH VOLUME (1868), INTIMATING A NEW SERIES OF "ALL THE YEAR
ROUND"



I beg to announce to the readers of this Journal, that on the
completion of the Twentieth Volume on the Twenty-eighth of November,
in the present year, I shall commence an entirely New Series of All
the Year Round.  The change is not only due to the convenience of
the public (with which a set of such books, extending beyond twenty
large volumes, would be quite incompatible), but is also resolved
upon for the purpose of effecting some desirable improvements in
respect of type, paper, and size of page, which could not otherwise
be made.  To the Literature of the New Series it would not become me
to refer, beyond glancing at the pages of this Journal, and of its
predecessor, through a score of years; inasmuch as my regular
fellow-labourers and I will be at our old posts, in company with
those younger comrades, whom I have had the pleasure of enrolling
from time to time, and whose number it is always one of my
pleasantest editorial duties to enlarge.

As it is better that every kind of work honestly undertaken and
discharged, should speak for itself than be spoken for, I will only
remark further on one intended omission in the New Series.  The
Extra Christmas Number has now been so extensively, and regularly,
and often imitated, that it is in very great danger of becoming
tiresome.  I have therefore resolved (though I cannot add,
willingly) to abolish it, at the highest tide of its success.

CHARLES DICKENS.



Footnotes:

{1}  Walter Savage Landor:  a Biography, by John Forster, 2 vols.
Chapman and Hall.





End of Project Gutenberg Etext of Contributions to:  All The Year Round 

The Project Gutenberg Etext of American Notes, by Charles Dickens
#9 in our series by Charles Dickens


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


American Notes for General Circulation

by Charles Dickens

October, 1996  [Etext #675]


The Project Gutenberg Etext of American Notes, by Charles Dickens
*****This file should be named amnts10.txt or amnts10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, amnts11.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, amnts10a.txt.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-two text
files per month:  or 400 more Etexts in 1996 for a total of 800.
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach 80 billion Etexts.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only 10% of the present number of computer users.  2001
should have at least twice as many computer users as that, so it
will require us reaching less than 5% of the users in 2001.


We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/BU":  and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law. (BU = Benedictine
University).  (Subscriptions to our paper newsletter go to BU.)

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext90 through /etext96
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET INDEX?00.GUT
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Benedictine University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association / Benedictine
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Benedictine University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





American Notes for General Circulation by Charles Dickens
Scanned and proofed by David Price
email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk





American Notes for General Circulation






PREFACE TO THE FIRST CHEAP EDITION OF "AMERICAN NOTES"



IT is nearly eight years since this book was first published.  I 
present it, unaltered, in the Cheap Edition; and such of my 
opinions as it expresses, are quite unaltered too.

My readers have opportunities of judging for themselves whether the 
influences and tendencies which I distrust in America, have any 
existence not in my imagination.  They can examine for themselves 
whether there has been anything in the public career of that 
country during these past eight years, or whether there is anything 
in its present position, at home or abroad, which suggests that 
those influences and tendencies really do exist.  As they find the 
fact, they will judge me.  If they discern any evidences of wrong-
going in any direction that I have indicated, they will acknowledge 
that I had reason in what I wrote.  If they discern no such thing, 
they will consider me altogether mistaken.

Prejudiced, I never have been otherwise than in favour of the 
United States.  No visitor can ever have set foot on those shores, 
with a stronger faith in the Republic than I had, when I landed in 
America.

I purposely abstain from extending these observations to any 
length.  I have nothing to defend, or to explain away.  The truth 
is the truth; and neither childish absurdities, nor unscrupulous 
contradictions, can make it otherwise.  The earth would still move 
round the sun, though the whole Catholic Church said No.

I have many friends in America, and feel a grateful interest in the 
country.  To represent me as viewing it with ill-nature, animosity, 
or partisanship, is merely to do a very foolish thing, which is 
always a very easy one; and which I have disregarded for eight 
years, and could disregard for eighty more.

LONDON, JUNE 22, 1850.




PREFACE TO THE "CHARLES DICKENS" EDITION OF "AMERICAN NOTES"



MY readers have opportunities of judging for themselves whether the 
influences and tendencies which I distrusted in America, had, at 
that time, any existence but in my imagination.  They can examine 
for themselves whether there has been anything in the public career 
of that country since, at home or abroad, which suggests that those 
influences and tendencies really did exist.  As they find the fact, 
they will judge me.  If they discern any evidences of wrong-going, 
in any direction that I have indicated, they will acknowledge that 
I had reason in what I wrote.  If they discern no such indications, 
they will consider me altogether mistaken - but not wilfully.

Prejudiced, I am not, and never have been, otherwise than in favour 
of the United States.  I have many friends in America, I feel a 
grateful interest in the country, I hope and believe it will 
successfully work out a problem of the highest importance to the 
whole human race.  To represent me as viewing AMERICA with ill-
nature, coldness, or animosity, is merely to do a very foolish 
thing:  which is always a very easy one.



CHAPTER I - GOING AWAY



I SHALL never forget the one-fourth serious and three-fourths 
comical astonishment, with which, on the morning of the third of 
January eighteen-hundred-and-forty-two, I opened the door of, and 
put my head into, a 'state-room' on board the Britannia steam-
packet, twelve hundred tons burthen per register, bound for Halifax 
and Boston, and carrying Her Majesty's mails.

That this state-room had been specially engaged for 'Charles 
Dickens, Esquire, and Lady,' was rendered sufficiently clear even 
to my scared intellect by a very small manuscript, announcing the 
fact, which was pinned on a very flat quilt, covering a very thin 
mattress, spread like a surgical plaster on a most inaccessible 
shelf.  But that this was the state-room concerning which Charles 
Dickens, Esquire, and Lady, had held daily and nightly conferences 
for at least four months preceding:  that this could by any 
possibility be that small snug chamber of the imagination, which 
Charles Dickens, Esquire, with the spirit of prophecy strong upon 
him, had always foretold would contain at least one little sofa, 
and which his lady, with a modest yet most magnificent sense of its 
limited dimensions, had from the first opined would not hold more 
than two enormous portmanteaus in some odd corner out of sight 
(portmanteaus which could now no more be got in at the door, not to 
say stowed away, than a giraffe could be persuaded or forced into a 
flower-pot):  that this utterly impracticable, thoroughly hopeless, 
and profoundly preposterous box, had the remotest reference to, or 
connection with, those chaste and pretty, not to say gorgeous 
little bowers, sketched by a masterly hand, in the highly varnished 
lithographic plan hanging up in the agent's counting-house in the 
city of London:  that this room of state, in short, could be 
anything but a pleasant fiction and cheerful jest of the captain's, 
invented and put in practice for the better relish and enjoyment of 
the real state-room presently to be disclosed:- these were truths 
which I really could not, for the moment, bring my mind at all to 
bear upon or comprehend.  And I sat down upon a kind of horsehair 
slab, or perch, of which there were two within; and looked, without 
any expression of countenance whatever, at some friends who had 
come on board with us, and who were crushing their faces into all 
manner of shapes by endeavouring to squeeze them through the small 
doorway.

We had experienced a pretty smart shock before coming below, which, 
but that we were the most sanguine people living, might have 
prepared us for the worst.  The imaginative artist to whom I have 
already made allusion, has depicted in the same great work, a 
chamber of almost interminable perspective, furnished, as Mr. 
Robins would say, in a style of more than Eastern splendour, and 
filled (but not inconveniently so) with groups of ladies and 
gentlemen, in the very highest state of enjoyment and vivacity.  
Before descending into the bowels of the ship, we had passed from 
the deck into a long narrow apartment, not unlike a gigantic hearse 
with windows in the sides; having at the upper end a melancholy 
stove, at which three or four chilly stewards were warming their 
hands; while on either side, extending down its whole dreary 
length, was a long, long table, over each of which a rack, fixed to 
the low roof, and stuck full of drinking-glasses and cruet-stands, 
hinted dismally at rolling seas and heavy weather.  I had not at 
that time seen the ideal presentment of this chamber which has 
since gratified me so much, but I observed that one of our friends 
who had made the arrangements for our voyage, turned pale on 
entering, retreated on the friend behind him., smote his forehead 
involuntarily, and said below his breath, 'Impossible! it cannot 
be!' or words to that effect.  He recovered himself however by a 
great effort, and after a preparatory cough or two, cried, with a 
ghastly smile which is still before me, looking at the same time 
round the walls, 'Ha! the breakfast-room, steward - eh?'  We all 
foresaw what the answer must be:  we knew the agony he suffered.  
He had often spoken of THE SALOON; had taken in and lived upon the 
pictorial idea; had usually given us to understand, at home, that 
to form a just conception of it, it would be necessary to multiply 
the size and furniture of an ordinary drawing-room by seven, and 
then fall short of the reality.  When the man in reply avowed the 
truth; the blunt, remorseless, naked truth; 'This is the saloon, 
sir' - he actually reeled beneath the blow.

In persons who were so soon to part, and interpose between their 
else daily communication the formidable barrier of many thousand 
miles of stormy space, and who were for that reason anxious to cast 
no other cloud, not even the passing shadow of a moment's 
disappointment or discomfiture, upon the short interval of happy 
companionship that yet remained to them - in persons so situated, 
the natural transition from these first surprises was obviously 
into peals of hearty laughter, and I can report that I, for one, 
being still seated upon the slab or perch before mentioned, roared 
outright until the vessel rang again.  Thus, in less than two 
minutes after coming upon it for the first time, we all by common 
consent agreed that this state-room was the pleasantest and most 
facetious and capital contrivance possible; and that to have had it 
one inch larger, would have been quite a disagreeable and 
deplorable state of things.  And with this; and with showing how, - 
by very nearly closing the door, and twining in and out like 
serpents, and by counting the little washing slab as standing-room, 
- we could manage to insinuate four people into it, all at one 
time; and entreating each other to observe how very airy it was (in 
dock), and how there was a beautiful port-hole which could be kept 
open all day (weather permitting), and how there was quite a large 
bull's-eye just over the looking-glass which would render shaving a 
perfectly easy and delightful process (when the ship didn't roll 
too much); we arrived, at last, at the unanimous conclusion that it 
was rather spacious than otherwise:  though I do verily believe 
that, deducting the two berths, one above the other, than which 
nothing smaller for sleeping in was ever made except coffins, it 
was no bigger than one of those hackney cabriolets which have the 
door behind, and shoot their fares out, like sacks of coals, upon 
the pavement.

Having settled this point to the perfect satisfaction of all 
parties, concerned and unconcerned, we sat down round the fire in 
the ladies' cabin - just to try the effect.  It was rather dark, 
certainly; but somebody said, 'of course it would be light, at 
sea,' a proposition to which we all assented; echoing 'of course, 
of course;' though it would be exceedingly difficult to say why we 
thought so.  I remember, too, when we had discovered and exhausted 
another topic of consolation in the circumstance of this ladies' 
cabin adjoining our state-room, and the consequently immense 
feasibility of sitting there at all times and seasons, and had 
fallen into a momentary silence, leaning our faces on our hands and 
looking at the fire, one of our party said, with the solemn air of 
a man who had made a discovery, 'What a relish mulled claret will 
have down here!' which appeared to strike us all most forcibly; as 
though there were something spicy and high-flavoured in cabins, 
which essentially improved that composition, and rendered it quite 
incapable of perfection anywhere else.

There was a stewardess, too, actively engaged in producing clean 
sheets and table-cloths from the very entrails of the sofas, and 
from unexpected lockers, of such artful mechanism, that it made 
one's head ache to see them opened one after another, and rendered 
it quite a distracting circumstance to follow her proceedings, and 
to find that every nook and corner and individual piece of 
furniture was something else besides what it pretended to be, and 
was a mere trap and deception and place of secret stowage, whose 
ostensible purpose was its least useful one.

God bless that stewardess for her piously fraudulent account of 
January voyages!  God bless her for her clear recollection of the 
companion passage of last year, when nobody was ill, and everybody 
dancing from morning to night, and it was 'a run' of twelve days, 
and a piece of the purest frolic, and delight, and jollity!  All 
happiness be with her for her bright face and her pleasant Scotch 
tongue, which had sounds of old Home in it for my fellow-traveller; 
and for her predictions of fair winds and fine weather (all wrong, 
or I shouldn't be half so fond of her); and for the ten thousand 
small fragments of genuine womanly tact, by which, without piecing 
them elaborately together, and patching them up into shape and form 
and case and pointed application, she nevertheless did plainly show 
that all young mothers on one side of the Atlantic were near and 
close at hand to their little children left upon the other; and 
that what seemed to the uninitiated a serious journey, was, to 
those who were in the secret, a mere frolic, to be sung about and 
whistled at!  Light be her heart, and gay her merry eyes, for 
years!

The state-room had grown pretty fast; but by this time it had 
expanded into something quite bulky, and almost boasted a bay-
window to view the sea from.  So we went upon deck again in high 
spirits; and there, everything was in such a state of bustle and 
active preparation, that the blood quickened its pace, and whirled 
through one's veins on that clear frosty morning with involuntary 
mirthfulness.  For every gallant ship was riding slowly up and 
down, and every little boat was splashing noisily in the water; and 
knots of people stood upon the wharf, gazing with a kind of 'dread 
delight' on the far-famed fast American steamer; and one party of 
men were 'taking in the milk,' or, in other words, getting the cow 
on board; and another were filling the icehouses to the very throat 
with fresh provisions; with butchers'-meat and garden-stuff, pale 
sucking-pigs, calves' heads in scores, beef, veal, and pork, and 
poultry out of all proportion; and others were coiling ropes and 
busy with oakum yarns; and others were lowering heavy packages into 
the hold; and the purser's head was barely visible as it loomed in 
a state, of exquisite perplexity from the midst of a vast pile of 
passengers' luggage; and there seemed to be nothing going on 
anywhere, or uppermost in the mind of anybody, but preparations for 
this mighty voyage.  This, with the bright cold sun, the bracing 
air, the crisply-curling water, the thin white crust of morning ice 
upon the decks which crackled with a sharp and cheerful sound 
beneath the lightest tread, was irresistible.  And when, again upon 
the shore, we turned and saw from the vessel's mast her name 
signalled in flags of joyous colours, and fluttering by their side 
the beautiful American banner with its stars and stripes, - the 
long three thousand miles and more, and, longer still, the six 
whole months of absence, so dwindled and faded, that the ship had 
gone out and come home again, and it was broad spring already in 
the Coburg Dock at Liverpool.

I have not inquired among my medical acquaintance, whether Turtle, 
and cold Punch, with Hock, Champagne, and Claret, and all the 
slight et cetera usually included in an unlimited order for a good 
dinner - especially when it is left to the liberal construction of 
my faultless friend, Mr. Radley, of the Adelphi Hotel - are 
peculiarly calculated to suffer a sea-change; or whether a plain 
mutton-chop, and a glass or two of sherry, would be less likely of 
conversion into foreign and disconcerting material.  My own opinion 
is, that whether one is discreet or indiscreet in these 
particulars, on the eve of a sea-voyage, is a matter of little 
consequence; and that, to use a common phrase, 'it comes to very 
much the same thing in the end.'  Be this as it may, I know that 
the dinner of that day was undeniably perfect; that it comprehended 
all these items, and a great many more; and that we all did ample 
justice to it.  And I know too, that, bating a certain tacit 
avoidance of any allusion to to-morrow; such as may be supposed to 
prevail between delicate-minded turnkeys, and a sensitive prisoner 
who is to be hanged next morning; we got on very well, and, all 
things considered, were merry enough.

When the morning - THE morning - came, and we met at breakfast, it 
was curious to see how eager we all were to prevent a moment's 
pause in the conversation, and how astoundingly gay everybody was:  
the forced spirits of each member of the little party having as 
much likeness to his natural mirth, as hot-house peas at five 
guineas the quart, resemble in flavour the growth of the dews, and 
air, and rain of Heaven.  But as one o'clock, the hour for going 
aboard, drew near, this volubility dwindled away by little and 
little, despite the most persevering efforts to the contrary, until 
at last, the matter being now quite desperate, we threw off all 
disguise; openly speculated upon where we should be this time to-
morrow, this time next day, and so forth; and entrusted a vast 
number of messages to those who intended returning to town that 
night, which were to be delivered at home and elsewhere without 
fail, within the very shortest possible space of time after the 
arrival of the railway train at Euston Square.  And commissions and 
remembrances do so crowd upon one at such a time, that we were 
still busied with this employment when we found ourselves fused, as 
it were, into a dense conglomeration of passengers and passengers' 
friends and passengers' luggage, all jumbled together on the deck 
of a small steamboat, and panting and snorting off to the packet, 
which had worked out of dock yesterday afternoon and was now lying 
at her moorings in the river.

And there she is! all eyes are turned to where she lies, dimly 
discernible through the gathering fog of the early winter 
afternoon; every finger is pointed in the same direction; and 
murmurs of interest and admiration - as 'How beautiful she looks!' 
'How trim she is!' - are heard on every side.  Even the lazy 
gentleman with his hat on one side and his hands in his pockets, 
who has dispensed so much consolation by inquiring with a yawn of 
another gentleman whether he is 'going across' - as if it were a 
ferry - even he condescends to look that way, and nod his head, as 
who should say, 'No mistake about THAT:' and not even the sage Lord 
Burleigh in his nod, included half so much as this lazy gentleman 
of might who has made the passage (as everybody on board has found 
out already; it's impossible to say how) thirteen times without a 
single accident!  There is another passenger very much wrapped-up, 
who has been frowned down by the rest, and morally trampled upon 
and crushed, for presuming to inquire with a timid interest how 
long it is since the poor President went down.  He is standing 
close to the lazy gentleman, and says with a faint smile that he 
believes She is a very strong Ship; to which the lazy gentleman, 
looking first in his questioner's eye and then very hard in the 
wind's, answers unexpectedly and ominously, that She need be.  Upon 
this the lazy gentleman instantly falls very low in the popular 
estimation, and the passengers, with looks of defiance, whisper to 
each other that he is an ass, and an impostor, and clearly don't 
know anything at all about it.

But we are made fast alongside the packet, whose huge red funnel is 
smoking bravely, giving rich promise of serious intentions.  
Packing-cases, portmanteaus, carpet-bags, and boxes, are already 
passed from hand to hand, and hauled on board with breathless 
rapidity.  The officers, smartly dressed, are at the gangway 
handing the passengers up the side, and hurrying the men.  In five 
minutes' time, the little steamer is utterly deserted, and the 
packet is beset and over-run by its late freight, who instantly 
pervade the whole ship, and are to be met with by the dozen in 
every nook and corner:  swarming down below with their own baggage, 
and stumbling over other people's; disposing themselves comfortably 
in wrong cabins, and creating a most horrible confusion by having 
to turn out again; madly bent upon opening locked doors, and on 
forcing a passage into all kinds of out-of-the-way places where 
there is no thoroughfare; sending wild stewards, with elfin hair, 
to and fro upon the breezy decks on unintelligible errands, 
impossible of execution:  and in short, creating the most 
extraordinary and bewildering tumult.  In the midst of all this, 
the lazy gentleman, who seems to have no luggage of any kind - not 
so much as a friend, even - lounges up and down the hurricane deck, 
coolly puffing a cigar; and, as this unconcerned demeanour again 
exalts him in the opinion of those who have leisure to observe his 
proceedings, every time he looks up at the masts, or down at the 
decks, or over the side, they look there too, as wondering whether 
he sees anything wrong anywhere, and hoping that, in case he 
should, he will have the goodness to mention it.

What have we here?  The captain's boat! and yonder the captain 
himself.  Now, by all our hopes and wishes, the very man he ought 
to be!  A well-made, tight-built, dapper little fellow; with a 
ruddy face, which is a letter of invitation to shake him by both 
hands at once; and with a clear, blue honest eye, that it does one 
good to see one's sparkling image in.  'Ring the bell!'  'Ding, 
ding, ding!' the very bell is in a hurry.  'Now for the shore - 
who's for the shore?' - 'These gentlemen, I am sorry to say.'  They 
are away, and never said, Good b'ye.  Ah now they wave it from the 
little boat.  'Good b'ye! Good b'ye!'  Three cheers from them; 
three more from us; three more from them:  and they are gone.

To and fro, to and fro, to and fro again a hundred times!  This 
waiting for the latest mail-bags is worse than all.  If we could 
have gone off in the midst of that last burst, we should have 
started triumphantly:  but to lie here, two hours and more in the 
damp fog, neither staying at home nor going abroad, is letting one 
gradually down into the very depths of dulness and low spirits.  A 
speck in the mist, at last!  That's something.  It is the boat we 
wait for!  That's more to the purpose.  The captain appears on the 
paddle-box with his speaking trumpet; the officers take their 
stations; all hands are on the alert; the flagging hopes of the 
passengers revive; the cooks pause in their savoury work, and look 
out with faces full of interest.  The boat comes alongside; the 
bags are dragged in anyhow, and flung down for the moment anywhere.  
Three cheers more:  and as the first one rings upon our ears, the 
vessel throbs like a strong giant that has just received the breath 
of life; the two great wheels turn fiercely round for the first 
time; and the noble ship, with wind and tide astern, breaks proudly 
through the lashed and roaming water.



CHAPTER II - THE PASSAGE OUT



WE all dined together that day; and a rather formidable party we 
were:  no fewer than eighty-six strong.  The vessel being pretty 
deep in the water, with all her coals on board and so many 
passengers, and the weather being calm and quiet, there was but 
little motion; so that before the dinner was half over, even those 
passengers who were most distrustful of themselves plucked up 
amazingly; and those who in the morning had returned to the 
universal question, 'Are you a good sailor?' a very decided 
negative, now either parried the inquiry with the evasive reply, 
'Oh! I suppose I'm no worse than anybody else;' or, reckless of all 
moral obligations, answered boldly 'Yes:' and with some irritation 
too, as though they would add, 'I should like to know what you see 
in ME, sir, particularly, to justify suspicion!'

Notwithstanding this high tone of courage and confidence, I could 
not but observe that very few remained long over their wine; and 
that everybody had an unusual love of the open air; and that the 
favourite and most coveted seats were invariably those nearest to 
the door.  The tea-table, too, was by no means as well attended as 
the dinner-table; and there was less whist-playing than might have 
been expected.  Still, with the exception of one lady, who had 
retired with some precipitation at dinner-time, immediately after 
being assisted to the finest cut of a very yellow boiled leg of 
mutton with very green capers, there were no invalids as yet; and 
walking, and smoking, and drinking of brandy-and-water (but always 
in the open air), went on with unabated spirit, until eleven 
o'clock or thereabouts, when 'turning in' - no sailor of seven 
hours' experience talks of going to bed - became the order of the 
night.  The perpetual tramp of boot-heels on the decks gave place 
to a heavy silence, and the whole human freight was stowed away 
below, excepting a very few stragglers, like myself, who were 
probably, like me, afraid to go there.

To one unaccustomed to such scenes, this is a very striking time on 
shipboard.  Afterwards, and when its novelty had long worn off, it 
never ceased to have a peculiar interest and charm for me.  The 
gloom through which the great black mass holds its direct and 
certain course; the rushing water, plainly heard, but dimly seen; 
the broad, white, glistening track, that follows in the vessel's 
wake; the men on the look-out forward, who would be scarcely 
visible against the dark sky, but for their blotting out some score 
of glistening stars; the helmsman at the wheel, with the 
illuminated card before him, shining, a speck of light amidst the 
darkness, like something sentient and of Divine intelligence; the 
melancholy sighing of the wind through block, and rope, and chain; 
the gleaming forth of light from every crevice, nook, and tiny 
piece of glass about the decks, as though the ship were filled with 
fire in hiding, ready to burst through any outlet, wild with its 
resistless power of death and ruin.  At first, too, and even when 
the hour, and all the objects it exalts, have come to be familiar, 
it is difficult, alone and thoughtful, to hold them to their proper 
shapes and forms.  They change with the wandering fancy; assume the 
semblance of things left far away; put on the well-remembered 
aspect of favourite places dearly loved; and even people them with 
shadows.  Streets, houses, rooms; figures so like their usual 
occupants, that they have startled me by their reality, which far 
exceeded, as it seemed to me, all power of mine to conjure up the 
absent; have, many and many a time, at such an hour, grown suddenly 
out of objects with whose real look, and use, and purpose, I was as 
well acquainted as with my own two hands.

My own two hands, and feet likewise, being very cold, however, on 
this particular occasion, I crept below at midnight.  It was not 
exactly comfortable below.  It was decidedly close; and it was 
impossible to be unconscious of the presence of that extraordinary 
compound of strange smells, which is to be found nowhere but on 
board ship, and which is such a subtle perfume that it seems to 
enter at every pore of the skin, and whisper of the hold.  Two 
passengers' wives (one of them my own) lay already in silent 
agonies on the sofa; and one lady's maid (MY lady's) was a mere 
bundle on the floor, execrating her destiny, and pounding her curl-
papers among the stray boxes.  Everything sloped the wrong way:  
which in itself was an aggravation scarcely to be borne.  I had 
left the door open, a moment before, in the bosom of a gentle 
declivity, and, when I turned to shut it, it was on the summit of a 
lofty eminence.  Now every plank and timber creaked, as if the ship 
were made of wicker-work; and now crackled, like an enormous fire 
of the driest possible twigs.  There was nothing for it but bed; so 
I went to bed.

It was pretty much the same for the next two days, with a tolerably 
fair wind and dry weather.  I read in bed (but to this hour I don't 
know what) a good deal; and reeled on deck a little; drank cold 
brandy-and-water with an unspeakable disgust, and ate hard biscuit 
perseveringly:  not ill, but going to be.

It is the third morning.  I am awakened out of my sleep by a dismal 
shriek from my wife, who demands to know whether there's any 
danger.  I rouse myself, and look out of bed.  The water-jug is 
plunging and leaping like a lively dolphin; all the smaller 
articles are afloat, except my shoes, which are stranded on a 
carpet-bag, high and dry, like a couple of coal-barges.  Suddenly I 
see them spring into the air, and behold the looking-glass, which 
is nailed to the wall, sticking fast upon the ceiling.  At the same 
time the door entirely disappears, and a new one is opened in the 
floor.  Then I begin to comprehend that the state-room is standing 
on its head.

Before it is possible to make any arrangement at all compatible 
with this novel state of things, the ship rights.  Before one can 
say 'Thank Heaven!' she wrongs again.  Before one can cry she IS 
wrong, she seems to have started forward, and to be a creature 
actually running of its own accord, with broken knees and failing 
legs, through every variety of hole and pitfall, and stumbling 
constantly.  Before one can so much as wonder, she takes a high 
leap into the air.  Before she has well done that, she takes a deep 
dive into the water.  Before she has gained the surface, she throws 
a summerset.  The instant she is on her legs, she rushes backward.  
And so she goes on staggering, heaving, wrestling, leaping, diving, 
jumping, pitching, throbbing, rolling, and rocking:  and going 
through all these movements, sometimes by turns, and sometimes 
altogether:  until one feels disposed to roar for mercy.

A steward passes.  'Steward!'  'Sir?'  'What IS the matter? what DO 
you call this?'  'Rather a heavy sea on, sir, and a head-wind.'

A head-wind!  Imagine a human face upon the vessel's prow, with 
fifteen thousand Samsons in one bent upon driving her back, and 
hitting her exactly between the eyes whenever she attempts to 
advance an inch.  Imagine the ship herself, with every pulse and 
artery of her huge body swollen and bursting under this 
maltreatment, sworn to go on or die.  Imagine the wind howling, the 
sea roaring, the rain beating:  all in furious array against her.  
Picture the sky both dark and wild, and the clouds, in fearful 
sympathy with the waves, making another ocean in the air.  Add to 
all this, the clattering on deck and down below; the tread of 
hurried feet; the loud hoarse shouts of seamen; the gurgling in and 
out of water through the scuppers; with, every now and then, the 
striking of a heavy sea upon the planks above, with the deep, dead, 
heavy sound of thunder heard within a vault; - and there is the 
head-wind of that January morning.

I say nothing of what may be called the domestic noises of the 
ship:  such as the breaking of glass and crockery, the tumbling 
down of stewards, the gambols, overhead, of loose casks and truant 
dozens of bottled porter, and the very remarkable and far from 
exhilarating sounds raised in their various state-rooms by the 
seventy passengers who were too ill to get up to breakfast.  I say 
nothing of them:  for although I lay listening to this concert for 
three or four days, I don't think I heard it for more than a 
quarter of a minute, at the expiration of which term, I lay down 
again, excessively sea-sick.

Not sea-sick, be it understood, in the ordinary acceptation of the 
term:  I wish I had been:  but in a form which I have never seen or 
heard described, though I have no doubt it is very common.  I lay 
there, all the day long, quite coolly and contentedly; with no 
sense of weariness, with no desire to get up, or get better, or 
take the air; with no curiosity, or care, or regret, of any sort or 
degree, saving that I think I can remember, in this universal 
indifference, having a kind of lazy joy - of fiendish delight, if 
anything so lethargic can be dignified with the title - in the fact 
of my wife being too ill to talk to me.  If I may be allowed to 
illustrate my state of mind by such an example, I should say that I 
was exactly in the condition of the elder Mr. Willet, after the 
incursion of the rioters into his bar at Chigwell.  Nothing would 
have surprised me.  If, in the momentary illumination of any ray of 
intelligence that may have come upon me in the way of thoughts of 
Home, a goblin postman, with a scarlet coat and bell, had come into 
that little kennel before me, broad awake in broad day, and, 
apologising for being damp through walking in the sea, had handed 
me a letter directed to myself, in familiar characters, I am 
certain I should not have felt one atom of astonishment:  I should 
have been perfectly satisfied.  If Neptune himself had walked in, 
with a toasted shark on his trident, I should have looked upon the 
event as one of the very commonest everyday occurrences.

Once - once - I found myself on deck.  I don't know how I got 
there, or what possessed me to go there, but there I was; and 
completely dressed too, with a huge pea-coat on, and a pair of 
boots such as no weak man in his senses could ever have got into.  
I found myself standing, when a gleam of consciousness came upon 
me, holding on to something.  I don't know what.  I think it was 
the boatswain:  or it may have been the pump:  or possibly the cow.  
I can't say how long I had been there; whether a day or a minute.  
I recollect trying to think about something (about anything in the 
whole wide world, I was not particular) without the smallest 
effect.  I could not even make out which was the sea, and which the 
sky, for the horizon seemed drunk, and was flying wildly about in 
all directions.  Even in that incapable state, however, I 
recognised the lazy gentleman standing before me:  nautically clad 
in a suit of shaggy blue, with an oilskin hat.  But I was too 
imbecile, although I knew it to be he, to separate him from his 
dress; and tried to call him, I remember, PILOT.  After another 
interval of total unconsciousness, I found he had gone, and 
recognised another figure in its place.  It seemed to wave and 
fluctuate before me as though I saw it reflected in an unsteady 
looking-glass; but I knew it for the captain; and such was the 
cheerful influence of his face, that I tried to smile:  yes, even 
then I tried to smile.  I saw by his gestures that he addressed me; 
but it was a long time before I could make out that he remonstrated 
against my standing up to my knees in water - as I was; of course I 
don't know why.  I tried to thank him, but couldn't.  I could only 
point to my boots - or wherever I supposed my boots to be - and say 
in a plaintive voice, 'Cork soles:' at the same time endeavouring, 
I am told, to sit down in the pool.  Finding that I was quite 
insensible, and for the time a maniac, he humanely conducted me 
below.

There I remained until I got better:  suffering, whenever I was 
recommended to eat anything, an amount of anguish only second to 
that which is said to be endured by the apparently drowned, in the 
process of restoration to life.  One gentleman on board had a 
letter of introduction to me from a mutual friend in London.  He 
sent it below with his card, on the morning of the head-wind; and I 
was long troubled with the idea that he might be up, and well, and 
a hundred times a day expecting me to call upon him in the saloon.  
I imagined him one of those cast-iron images - I will not call them 
men - who ask, with red faces, and lusty voices, what sea-sickness 
means, and whether it really is as bad as it is represented to be.  
This was very torturing indeed; and I don't think I ever felt such 
perfect gratification and gratitude of heart, as I did when I heard 
from the ship's doctor that he had been obliged to put a large 
mustard poultice on this very gentleman's stomach.  I date my 
recovery from the receipt of that intelligence.

It was materially assisted though, I have no doubt, by a heavy gale 
of wind, which came slowly up at sunset, when we were about ten 
days out, and raged with gradually increasing fury until morning, 
saving that it lulled for an hour a little before midnight.  There 
was something in the unnatural repose of that hour, and in the 
after gathering of the storm, so inconceivably awful and 
tremendous, that its bursting into full violence was almost a 
relief.

The labouring of the ship in the troubled sea on this night I shall 
never forget.  'Will it ever be worse than this?' was a question I 
had often heard asked, when everything was sliding and bumping 
about, and when it certainly did seem difficult to comprehend the 
possibility of anything afloat being more disturbed, without 
toppling over and going down.  But what the agitation of a steam-
vessel is, on a bad winter's night in the wild Atlantic, it is 
impossible for the most vivid imagination to conceive.  To say that 
she is flung down on her side in the waves, with her masts dipping 
into them, and that, springing up again, she rolls over on the 
other side, until a heavy sea strikes her with the noise of a 
hundred great guns, and hurls her back - that she stops, and 
staggers, and shivers, as though stunned, and then, with a violent 
throbbing at her heart, darts onward like a monster goaded into 
madness, to be beaten down, and battered, and crushed, and leaped 
on by the angry sea - that thunder, lightning, hail, and rain, and 
wind, are all in fierce contention for the mastery - that every 
plank has its groan, every nail its shriek, and every drop of water 
in the great ocean its howling voice - is nothing.  To say that all 
is grand, and all appalling and horrible in the last degree, is 
nothing.  Words cannot express it.  Thoughts cannot convey it.  
Only a dream can call it up again, in all its fury, rage, and 
passion.

And yet, in the very midst of these terrors, I was placed in a 
situation so exquisitely ridiculous, that even then I had as strong 
a sense of its absurdity as I have now, and could no more help 
laughing than I can at any other comical incident, happening under 
circumstances the most favourable to its enjoyment.  About midnight 
we shipped a sea, which forced its way through the skylights, burst 
open the doors above, and came raging and roaring down into the 
ladies' cabin, to the unspeakable consternation of my wife and a 
little Scotch lady - who, by the way, had previously sent a message 
to the captain by the stewardess, requesting him, with her 
compliments, to have a steel conductor immediately attached to the 
top of every mast, and to the chimney, in order that the ship might 
not be struck by lightning.  They and the handmaid before 
mentioned, being in such ecstasies of fear that I scarcely knew 
what to do with them, I naturally bethought myself of some 
restorative or comfortable cordial; and nothing better occurring to 
me, at the moment, than hot brandy-and-water, I procured a tumbler 
full without delay.  It being impossible to stand or sit without 
holding on, they were all heaped together in one corner of a long 
sofa - a fixture extending entirely across the cabin - where they 
clung to each other in momentary expectation of being drowned.  
When I approached this place with my specific, and was about to 
administer it with many consolatory expressions to the nearest 
sufferer, what was my dismay to see them all roll slowly down to 
the other end!  And when I staggered to that end, and held out the 
glass once more, how immensely baffled were my good intentions by 
the ship giving another lurch, and their all rolling back again!  I 
suppose I dodged them up and down this sofa for at least a quarter 
of an hour, without reaching them once; and by the time I did catch 
them, the brandy-and-water was diminished, by constant spilling, to 
a teaspoonful.  To complete the group, it is necessary to recognise 
in this disconcerted dodger, an individual very pale from sea-
sickness, who had shaved his beard and brushed his hair, last, at 
Liverpool:  and whose only article of dress (linen not included) 
were a pair of dreadnought trousers; a blue jacket, formerly 
admired upon the Thames at Richmond; no stockings; and one slipper.

Of the outrageous antics performed by that ship next morning; which 
made bed a practical joke, and getting up, by any process short of 
falling out, an impossibility; I say nothing.  But anything like 
the utter dreariness and desolation that met my eyes when I 
literally 'tumbled up' on deck at noon, I never saw.  Ocean and sky 
were all of one dull, heavy, uniform, lead colour.  There was no 
extent of prospect even over the dreary waste that lay around us, 
for the sea ran high, and the horizon encompassed us like a large 
black hoop.  Viewed from the air, or some tall bluff on shore, it 
would have been imposing and stupendous, no doubt; but seen from 
the wet and rolling decks, it only impressed one giddily and 
painfully.  In the gale of last night the life-boat had been 
crushed by one blow of the sea like a walnut-shell; and there it 
hung dangling in the air:  a mere faggot of crazy boards.  The 
planking of the paddle-boxes had been torn sheer away.  The wheels 
were exposed and bare; and they whirled and dashed their spray 
about the decks at random.  Chimney, white with crusted salt; 
topmasts struck; storm-sails set; rigging all knotted, tangled, 
wet, and drooping:  a gloomier picture it would be hard to look 
upon.

I was now comfortably established by courtesy in the ladies' cabin, 
where, besides ourselves, there were only four other passengers.  
First, the little Scotch lady before mentioned, on her way to join 
her husband at New York, who had settled there three years before.  
Secondly and thirdly, an honest young Yorkshireman, connected with 
some American house; domiciled in that same city, and carrying 
thither his beautiful young wife to whom he had been married but a 
fortnight, and who was the fairest specimen of a comely English 
country girl I have ever seen.  Fourthy, fifthly, and lastly, 
another couple:  newly married too, if one might judge from the 
endearments they frequently interchanged:  of whom I know no more 
than that they were rather a mysterious, run-away kind of couple; 
that the lady had great personal attractions also; and that the 
gentleman carried more guns with him than Robinson Crusoe, wore a 
shooting-coat, and had two great dogs on board.  On further 
consideration, I remember that he tried hot roast pig and bottled 
ale as a cure for sea-sickness; and that he took these remedies 
(usually in bed) day after day, with astonishing perseverance.  I 
may add, for the information of the curious, that they decidedly 
failed.

The weather continuing obstinately and almost unprecedentedly bad, 
we usually straggled into this cabin, more or less faint and 
miserable, about an hour before noon, and lay down on the sofas to 
recover; during which interval, the captain would look in to 
communicate the state of the wind, the moral certainty of its 
changing to-morrow (the weather is always going to improve to-
morrow, at sea), the vessel's rate of sailing, and so forth.  
Observations there were none to tell us of, for there was no sun to 
take them by.  But a description of one day will serve for all the 
rest.  Here it is.

The captain being gone, we compose ourselves to read, if the place 
be light enough; and if not, we doze and talk alternately.  At one, 
a bell rings, and the stewardess comes down with a steaming dish of 
baked potatoes, and another of roasted apples; and plates of pig's 
face, cold ham, salt beef; or perhaps a smoking mess of rare hot 
collops.  We fall to upon these dainties; eat as much as we can (we 
have great appetites now); and are as long as possible about it.  
If the fire will burn (it WILL sometimes) we are pretty cheerful.  
If it won't, we all remark to each other that it's very cold, rub 
our hands, cover ourselves with coats and cloaks, and lie down 
again to doze, talk, and read (provided as aforesaid), until 
dinner-time.  At five, another bell rings, and the stewardess 
reappears with another dish of potatoes - boiled this time - and 
store of hot meat of various kinds:  not forgetting the roast pig, 
to be taken medicinally.  We sit down at table again (rather more 
cheerfully than before); prolong the meal with a rather mouldy 
dessert of apples, grapes, and oranges; and drink our wine and 
brandy-and-water.  The bottles and glasses are still upon the 
table, and the oranges and so forth are rolling about according to 
their fancy and the ship's way, when the doctor comes down, by 
special nightly invitation, to join our evening rubber:  
immediately on whose arrival we make a party at whist, and as it is 
a rough night and the cards will not lie on the cloth, we put the 
tricks in our pockets as we take them.  At whist we remain with 
exemplary gravity (deducting a short time for tea and toast) until 
eleven o'clock, or thereabouts; when the captain comes down again, 
in a sou'-wester hat tied under his chin, and a pilot-coat:  making 
the ground wet where he stands.  By this time the card-playing is 
over, and the bottles and glasses are again upon the table; and 
after an hour's pleasant conversation about the ship, the 
passengers, and things in general, the captain (who never goes to 
bed, and is never out of humour) turns up his coat collar for the 
deck again; shakes hands all round; and goes laughing out into the 
weather as merrily as to a birthday party.

As to daily news, there is no dearth of that commodity.  This 
passenger is reported to have lost fourteen pounds at Vingt-et-un 
in the saloon yesterday; and that passenger drinks his bottle of 
champagne every day, and how he does it (being only a clerk), 
nobody knows.  The head engineer has distinctly said that there 
never was such times - meaning weather - and four good hands are 
ill, and have given in, dead beat.  Several berths are full of 
water, and all the cabins are leaky.  The ship's cook, secretly 
swigging damaged whiskey, has been found drunk; and has been played 
upon by the fire-engine until quite sober.  All the stewards have 
fallen down-stairs at various dinner-times, and go about with 
plasters in various places.  The baker is ill, and so is the 
pastry-cook.  A new man, horribly indisposed, has been required to 
fill the place of the latter officer; and has been propped and 
jammed up with empty casks in a little house upon deck, and 
commanded to roll out pie-crust, which he protests (being highly 
bilious) it is death to him to look at.  News!  A dozen murders on 
shore would lack the interest of these slight incidents at sea.

Divided between our rubber and such topics as these, we were 
running (as we thought) into Halifax Harbour, on the fifteenth 
night, with little wind and a bright moon - indeed, we had made the 
Light at its outer entrance, and put the pilot in charge - when 
suddenly the ship struck upon a bank of mud.  An immediate rush on 
deck took place of course; the sides were crowded in an instant; 
and for a few minutes we were in as lively a state of confusion as 
the greatest lover of disorder would desire to see.  The 
passengers, and guns, and water-casks, and other heavy matters, 
being all huddled together aft, however, to lighten her in the 
head, she was soon got off; and after some driving on towards an 
uncomfortable line of objects (whose vicinity had been announced 
very early in the disaster by a loud cry of 'Breakers a-head!') and 
much backing of paddles, and heaving of the lead into a constantly 
decreasing depth of water, we dropped anchor in a strange 
outlandish-looking nook which nobody on board could recognise, 
although there was land all about us, and so close that we could 
plainly see the waving branches of the trees.

It was strange enough, in the silence of midnight, and the dead 
stillness that seemed to be created by the sudden and unexpected 
stoppage of the engine which had been clanking and blasting in our 
ears incessantly for so many days, to watch the look of blank 
astonishment expressed in every face:  beginning with the officers, 
tracing it through all the passengers, and descending to the very 
stokers and furnacemen, who emerged from below, one by one, and 
clustered together in a smoky group about the hatchway of the 
engine-room, comparing notes in whispers.  After throwing up a few 
rockets and firing signal guns in the hope of being hailed from the 
land, or at least of seeing a light - but without any other sight 
or sound presenting itself - it was determined to send a boat on 
shore.  It was amusing to observe how very kind some of the 
passengers were, in volunteering to go ashore in this same boat:  
for the general good, of course:  not by any means because they 
thought the ship in an unsafe position, or contemplated the 
possibility of her heeling over in case the tide were running out.  
Nor was it less amusing to remark how desperately unpopular the 
poor pilot became in one short minute.  He had had his passage out 
from Liverpool, and during the whole voyage had been quite a 
notorious character, as a teller of anecdotes and cracker of jokes.  
Yet here were the very men who had laughed the loudest at his 
jests, now flourishing their fists in his face, loading him with 
imprecations, and defying him to his teeth as a villain!

The boat soon shoved off, with a lantern and sundry blue lights on 
board; and in less than an hour returned; the officer in command 
bringing with him a tolerably tall young tree, which he had plucked 
up by the roots, to satisfy certain distrustful passengers whose 
minds misgave them that they were to be imposed upon and 
shipwrecked, and who would on no other terms believe that he had 
been ashore, or had done anything but fraudulently row a little way 
into the mist, specially to deceive them and compass their deaths.  
Our captain had foreseen from the first that we must be in a place 
called the Eastern passage; and so we were.  It was about the last 
place in the world in which we had any business or reason to be, 
but a sudden fog, and some error on the pilot's part, were the 
cause.  We were surrounded by banks, and rocks, and shoals of all 
kinds, but had happily drifted, it seemed, upon the only safe speck 
that was to be found thereabouts.  Eased by this report, and by the 
assurance that the tide was past the ebb, we turned in at three 
o'clock in the morning.

I was dressing about half-past nine next day, when the noise above 
hurried me on deck.  When I had left it overnight, it was dark, 
foggy, and damp, and there were bleak hills all round us.  Now, we 
were gliding down a smooth, broad stream, at the rate of eleven 
miles an hour:  our colours flying gaily; our crew rigged out in 
their smartest clothes; our officers in uniform again; the sun 
shining as on a brilliant April day in England; the land stretched 
out on either side, streaked with light patches of snow; white 
wooden houses; people at their doors; telegraphs working; flags 
hoisted; wharfs appearing; ships; quays crowded with people; 
distant noises; shouts; men and boys running down steep places 
towards the pier:  all more bright and gay and fresh to our unused 
eyes than words can paint them.  We came to a wharf, paved with 
uplifted faces; got alongside, and were made fast, after some 
shouting and straining of cables; darted, a score of us along the 
gangway, almost as soon as it was thrust out to meet us, and before 
it had reached the ship - and leaped upon the firm glad earth 
again!

I suppose this Halifax would have appeared an Elysium, though it 
had been a curiosity of ugly dulness.  But I carried away with me a 
most pleasant impression of the town and its inhabitants, and have 
preserved it to this hour.  Nor was it without regret that I came 
home, without having found an opportunity of returning thither, and 
once more shaking hands with the friends I made that day.

It happened to be the opening of the Legislative Council and 
General Assembly, at which ceremonial the forms observed on the 
commencement of a new Session of Parliament in England were so 
closely copied, and so gravely presented on a small scale, that it 
was like looking at Westminster through the wrong end of a 
telescope.  The governor, as her Majesty's representative, 
delivered what may be called the Speech from the Throne.  He said 
what he had to say manfully and well.  The military band outside 
the building struck up "God save the Queen" with great vigour 
before his Excellency had quite finished; the people shouted; the 
in's rubbed their hands; the out's shook their heads; the 
Government party said there never was such a good speech; the 
Opposition declared there never was such a bad one; the Speaker and 
members of the House of Assembly withdrew from the bar to say a 
great deal among themselves and do a little:  and, in short, 
everything went on, and promised to go on, just as it does at home 
upon the like occasions.

The town is built on the side of a hill, the highest point being 
commanded by a strong fortress, not yet quite finished.  Several 
streets of good breadth and appearance extend from its summit to 
the water-side, and are intersected by cross streets running 
parallel with the river.  The houses are chiefly of wood.  The 
market is abundantly supplied; and provisions are exceedingly 
cheap.  The weather being unusually mild at that time for the 
season of the year, there was no sleighing:  but there were plenty 
of those vehicles in yards and by-places, and some of them, from 
the gorgeous quality of their decorations, might have 'gone on' 
without alteration as triumphal cars in a melodrama at Astley's.  
The day was uncommonly fine; the air bracing and healthful; the 
whole aspect of the town cheerful, thriving, and industrious.

We lay there seven hours, to deliver and exchange the mails.  At 
length, having collected all our bags and all our passengers 
(including two or three choice spirits, who, having indulged too 
freely in oysters and champagne, were found lying insensible on 
their backs in unfrequented streets), the engines were again put in 
motion, and we stood off for Boston.

Encountering squally weather again in the Bay of Fundy, we tumbled 
and rolled about as usual all that night and all next day.  On the 
next afternoon, that is to say, on Saturday, the twenty-second of 
January, an American pilot-boat came alongside, and soon afterwards 
the Britannia steam-packet, from Liverpool, eighteen days out, was 
telegraphed at Boston.

The indescribable interest with which I strained my eyes, as the 
first patches of American soil peeped like molehills from the green 
sea, and followed them, as they swelled, by slow and almost 
imperceptible degrees, into a continuous line of coast, can hardly 
be exaggerated.  A sharp keen wind blew dead against us; a hard 
frost prevailed on shore; and the cold was most severe.  Yet the 
air was so intensely clear, and dry, and bright, that the 
temperature was not only endurable, but delicious.

How I remained on deck, staring about me, until we came alongside 
the dock, and how, though I had had as many eyes as Argus, I should 
have had them all wide open, and all employed on new objects - are 
topics which I will not prolong this chapter to discuss.  Neither 
will I more than hint at my foreigner-like mistake in supposing 
that a party of most active persons, who scrambled on board at the 
peril of their lives as we approached the wharf, were newsmen, 
answering to that industrious class at home; whereas, despite the 
leathern wallets of news slung about the necks of some, and the 
broad sheets in the hands of all, they were Editors, who boarded 
ships in person (as one gentleman in a worsted comforter informed 
me), 'because they liked the excitement of it.'  Suffice it in this 
place to say, that one of these invaders, with a ready courtesy for 
which I thank him here most gratefully, went on before to order 
rooms at the hotel; and that when I followed, as I soon did, I 
found myself rolling through the long passages with an involuntary 
imitation of the gait of Mr. T. P. Cooke, in a new nautical 
melodrama.

'Dinner, if you please,' said I to the waiter.

'When?' said the waiter.

'As quick as possible,' said I.

'Right away?' said the waiter.

After a moment's hesitation, I answered 'No,' at hazard.

'NOT right away?' cried the waiter, with an amount of surprise that 
made me start.

I looked at him doubtfully, and returned, 'No; I would rather have 
it in this private room.  I like it very much.'

At this, I really thought the waiter must have gone out of his 
mind:  as I believe he would have done, but for the interposition 
of another man, who whispered in his ear, 'Directly.'

'Well! and that's a fact!' said the waiter, looking helplessly at 
me:  'Right away.'

I saw now that 'Right away' and 'Directly' were one and the same 
thing.  So I reversed my previous answer, and sat down to dinner in 
ten minutes afterwards; and a capital dinner it was.

The hotel (a very excellent one) is called the Tremont House.  It 
has more galleries, colonnades, piazzas, and passages than I can 
remember, or the reader would believe.



CHAPTER III - BOSTON



IN all the public establishments of America, the utmost courtesy 
prevails.  Most of our Departments are susceptible of considerable 
improvement in this respect, but the Custom-house above all others 
would do well to take example from the United States and render 
itself somewhat less odious and offensive to foreigners.  The 
servile rapacity of the French officials is sufficiently 
contemptible; but there is a surly boorish incivility about our 
men, alike disgusting to all persons who fall into their hands, and 
discreditable to the nation that keeps such ill-conditioned curs 
snarling about its gates.

When I landed in America, I could not help being strongly impressed 
with the contrast their Custom-house presented, and the attention, 
politeness and good humour with which its officers discharged their 
duty.

As we did not land at Boston, in consequence of some detention at 
the wharf, until after dark, I received my first impressions of the 
city in walking down to the Custom-house on the morning after our 
arrival, which was Sunday.  I am afraid to say, by the way, how 
many offers of pews and seats in church for that morning were made 
to us, by formal note of invitation, before we had half finished 
our first dinner in America, but if I may be allowed to make a 
moderate guess, without going into nicer calculation, I should say 
that at least as many sittings were proffered us, as would have 
accommodated a score or two of grown-up families.  The number of 
creeds and forms of religion to which the pleasure of our company 
was requested, was in very fair proportion.

Not being able, in the absence of any change of clothes, to go to 
church that day, we were compelled to decline these kindnesses, one 
and all; and I was reluctantly obliged to forego the delight of 
hearing Dr. Channing, who happened to preach that morning for the 
first time in a very long interval.  I mention the name of this 
distinguished and accomplished man (with whom I soon afterwards had 
the pleasure of becoming personally acquainted), that I may have 
the gratification of recording my humble tribute of admiration and 
respect for his high abilities and character; and for the bold 
philanthropy with which he has ever opposed himself to that most 
hideous blot and foul disgrace - Slavery.

To return to Boston.  When I got into the streets upon this Sunday 
morning, the air was so clear, the houses were so bright and gay:  
the signboards were painted in such gaudy colours; the gilded 
letters were so very golden; the bricks were so very red, the stone 
was so very white, the blinds and area railings were so very green, 
the knobs and plates upon the street doors so marvellously bright 
and twinkling; and all so slight and unsubstantial in appearance - 
that every thoroughfare in the city looked exactly like a scene in 
a pantomime.  It rarely happens in the business streets that a 
tradesman, if I may venture to call anybody a tradesman, where 
everybody is a merchant, resides above his store; so that many 
occupations are often carried on in one house, and the whole front 
is covered with boards and inscriptions.  As I walked along, I kept 
glancing up at these boards, confidently expecting to see a few of 
them change into something; and I never turned a corner suddenly 
without looking out for the clown and pantaloon, who, I had no 
doubt, were hiding in a doorway or behind some pillar close at 
hand.  As to Harlequin and Columbine, I discovered immediately that 
they lodged (they are always looking after lodgings in a pantomime) 
at a very small clockmaker's one story high, near the hotel; which, 
in addition to various symbols and devices, almost covering the 
whole front, had a great dial hanging out - to be jumped through, 
of course.

The suburbs are, if possible, even more unsubstantial-looking than 
the city.  The white wooden houses (so white that it makes one wink 
to look at them), with their green jalousie blinds, are so 
sprinkled and dropped about in all directions, without seeming to 
have any root at all in the ground; and the small churches and 
chapels are so prim, and bright, and highly varnished; that I 
almost believed the whole affair could be taken up piecemeal like a 
child's toy, and crammed into a little box.

The city is a beautiful one, and cannot fail, I should imagine, to 
impress all strangers very favourably.  The private dwelling-houses 
are, for the most part, large and elegant; the shops extremely 
good; and the public buildings handsome.  The State House is built 
upon the summit of a hill, which rises gradually at first, and 
afterwards by a steep ascent, almost from the water's edge.  In 
front is a green enclosure, called the Common.  The site is 
beautiful:  and from the top there is a charming panoramic view of 
the whole town and neighbourhood.  In addition to a variety of 
commodious offices, it contains two handsome chambers; in one the 
House of Representatives of the State hold their meetings:  in the 
other, the Senate.  Such proceedings as I saw here, were conducted 
with perfect gravity and decorum; and were certainly calculated to 
inspire attention and respect.

There is no doubt that much of the intellectual refinement and 
superiority of Boston, is referable to the quiet influence of the 
University of Cambridge, which is within three or four miles of the 
city.  The resident professors at that university are gentlemen of 
learning and varied attainments; and are, without one exception 
that I can call to mind, men who would shed a grace upon, and do 
honour to, any society in the civilised world.  Many of the 
resident gentry in Boston and its neighbourhood, and I think I am 
not mistaken in adding, a large majority of those who are attached 
to the liberal professions there, have been educated at this same 
school.  Whatever the defects of American universities may be, they 
disseminate no prejudices; rear no bigots; dig up the buried ashes 
of no old superstitions; never interpose between the people and 
their improvement; exclude no man because of his religious 
opinions; above all, in their whole course of study and 
instruction, recognise a world, and a broad one too, lying beyond 
the college walls.

It was a source of inexpressible pleasure to me to observe the 
almost imperceptible, but not less certain effect, wrought by this 
institution among the small community of Boston; and to note at 
every turn the humanising tastes and desires it has engendered; the 
affectionate friendships to which it has given rise; the amount of 
vanity and prejudice it has dispelled.  The golden calf they 
worship at Boston is a pigmy compared with the giant effigies set 
up in other parts of that vast counting-house which lies beyond the 
Atlantic; and the almighty dollar sinks into something 
comparatively insignificant, amidst a whole Pantheon of better 
gods.

Above all, I sincerely believe that the public institutions and 
charities of this capital of Massachusetts are as nearly perfect, 
as the most considerate wisdom, benevolence, and humanity, can make 
them.  I never in my life was more affected by the contemplation of 
happiness, under circumstances of privation and bereavement, than 
in my visits to these establishments.

It is a great and pleasant feature of all such institutions in 
America, that they are either supported by the State or assisted by 
the State; or (in the event of their not needing its helping hand) 
that they act in concert with it, and are emphatically the 
people's.  I cannot but think, with a view to the principle and its 
tendency to elevate or depress the character of the industrious 
classes, that a Public Charity is immeasurably better than a 
Private Foundation, no matter how munificently the latter may be 
endowed.  In our own country, where it has not, until within these 
later days, been a very popular fashion with governments to display 
any extraordinary regard for the great mass of the people or to 
recognise their existence as improvable creatures, private 
charities, unexampled in the history of the earth, have arisen, to 
do an incalculable amount of good among the destitute and 
afflicted.  But the government of the country, having neither act 
nor part in them, is not in the receipt of any portion of the 
gratitude they inspire; and, offering very little shelter or relief 
beyond that which is to be found in the workhouse and the jail, has 
come, not unnaturally, to be looked upon by the poor rather as a 
stern master, quick to correct and punish, than a kind protector, 
merciful and vigilant in their hour of need.

The maxim that out of evil cometh good, is strongly illustrated by 
these establishments at home; as the records of the Prerogative 
Office in Doctors' Commons can abundantly prove.  Some immensely 
rich old gentleman or lady, surrounded by needy relatives, makes, 
upon a low average, a will a-week.  The old gentleman or lady, 
never very remarkable in the best of times for good temper, is full 
of aches and pains from head to foot; full of fancies and caprices; 
full of spleen, distrust, suspicion, and dislike.  To cancel old 
wills, and invent new ones, is at last the sole business of such a 
testator's existence; and relations and friends (some of whom have 
been bred up distinctly to inherit a large share of the property, 
and have been, from their cradles, specially disqualified from 
devoting themselves to any useful pursuit, on that account) are so 
often and so unexpectedly and summarily cut off, and reinstated, 
and cut off again, that the whole family, down to the remotest 
cousin, is kept in a perpetual fever.  At length it becomes plain 
that the old lady or gentleman has not long to live; and the 
plainer this becomes, the more clearly the old lady or gentleman 
perceives that everybody is in a conspiracy against their poor old 
dying relative; wherefore the old lady or gentleman makes another 
last will - positively the last this time - conceals the same in a 
china teapot, and expires next day.  Then it turns out, that the 
whole of the real and personal estate is divided between half-a-
dozen charities; and that the dead and gone testator has in pure 
spite helped to do a great deal of good, at the cost of an immense 
amount of evil passion and misery.

The Perkins Institution and Massachusetts Asylum for the Blind, at 
Boston, is superintended by a body of trustees who make an annual 
report to the corporation.  The indigent blind of that state are 
admitted gratuitously.  Those from the adjoining state of 
Connecticut, or from the states of Maine, Vermont, or New 
Hampshire, are admitted by a warrant from the state to which they 
respectively belong; or, failing that, must find security among 
their friends, for the payment of about twenty pounds English for 
their first year's board and instruction, and ten for the second.  
'After the first year,' say the trustees, 'an account current will 
be opened with each pupil; he will be charged with the actual cost 
of his board, which will not exceed two dollars per week;' a trifle 
more than eight shillings English; 'and he will be credited with 
the amount paid for him by the state, or by his friends; also with 
his earnings over and above the cost of the stock which he uses; so 
that all his earnings over one dollar per week will be his own.  By 
the third year it will be known whether his earnings will more than 
pay the actual cost of his board; if they should, he will have it 
at his option to remain and receive his earnings, or not.  Those 
who prove unable to earn their own livelihood will not be retained; 
as it is not desirable to convert the establishment into an alms-
house, or to retain any but working bees in the hive.  Those who by 
physical or mental imbecility are disqualified from work, are 
thereby disqualified from being members of an industrious 
community; and they can be better provided for in establishments 
fitted for the infirm.'

I went to see this place one very fine winter morning:  an Italian 
sky above, and the air so clear and bright on every side, that even 
my eyes, which are none of the best, could follow the minute lines 
and scraps of tracery in distant buildings.  Like most other public 
institutions in America, of the same class, it stands a mile or two 
without the town, in a cheerful healthy spot; and is an airy, 
spacious, handsome edifice.  It is built upon a height, commanding 
the harbour.  When I paused for a moment at the door, and marked 
how fresh and free the whole scene was - what sparkling bubbles 
glanced upon the waves, and welled up every moment to the surface, 
as though the world below, like that above, were radiant with the 
bright day, and gushing over in its fulness of light:  when I gazed 
from sail to sail away upon a ship at sea, a tiny speck of shining 
white, the only cloud upon the still, deep, distant blue - and, 
turning, saw a blind boy with his sightless face addressed that 
way, as though he too had some sense within him of the glorious 
distance:  I felt a kind of sorrow that the place should be so very 
light, and a strange wish that for his sake it were darker.  It was 
but momentary, of course, and a mere fancy, but I felt it keenly 
for all that.

The children were at their daily tasks in different rooms, except a 
few who were already dismissed, and were at play.  Here, as in many 
institutions, no uniform is worn; and I was very glad of it, for 
two reasons.  Firstly, because I am sure that nothing but senseless 
custom and want of thought would reconcile us to the liveries and 
badges we are so fond of at home.  Secondly, because the absence of 
these things presents each child to the visitor in his or her own 
proper character, with its individuality unimpaired; not lost in a 
dull, ugly, monotonous repetition of the same unmeaning garb:  
which is really an important consideration.  The wisdom of 
encouraging a little harmless pride in personal appearance even 
among the blind, or the whimsical absurdity of considering charity 
and leather breeches inseparable companions, as we do, requires no 
comment.

Good order, cleanliness, and comfort, pervaded every corner of the 
building.  The various classes, who were gathered round their 
teachers, answered the questions put to them with readiness and 
intelligence, and in a spirit of cheerful contest for precedence 
which pleased me very much.  Those who were at play, were gleesome 
and noisy as other children.  More spiritual and affectionate 
friendships appeared to exist among them, than would be found among 
other young persons suffering under no deprivation; but this I 
expected and was prepared to find.  It is a part of the great 
scheme of Heaven's merciful consideration for the afflicted.

In a portion of the building, set apart for that purpose, are work-
shops for blind persons whose education is finished, and who have 
acquired a trade, but who cannot pursue it in an ordinary 
manufactory because of their deprivation.  Several people were at 
work here; making brushes, mattresses, and so forth; and the 
cheerfulness, industry, and good order discernible in every other 
part of the building, extended to this department also.

On the ringing of a bell, the pupils all repaired, without any 
guide or leader, to a spacious music-hall, where they took their 
seats in an orchestra erected for that purpose, and listened with 
manifest delight to a voluntary on the organ, played by one of 
themselves.  At its conclusion, the performer, a boy of nineteen or 
twenty, gave place to a girl; and to her accompaniment they all 
sang a hymn, and afterwards a sort of chorus.  It was very sad to 
look upon and hear them, happy though their condition 
unquestionably was; and I saw that one blind girl, who (being for 
the time deprived of the use of her limbs, by illness) sat close 
beside me with her face towards them, wept silently the while she 
listened.

It is strange to watch the faces of the blind, and see how free 
they are from all concealment of what is passing in their thoughts; 
observing which, a man with eyes may blush to contemplate the mask 
he wears.  Allowing for one shade of anxious expression which is 
never absent from their countenances, and the like of which we may 
readily detect in our own faces if we try to feel our way in the 
dark, every idea, as it rises within them, is expressed with the 
lightning's speed and nature's truth.  If the company at a rout, or 
drawing-room at court, could only for one time be as unconscious of 
the eyes upon them as blind men and women are, what secrets would 
come out, and what a worker of hypocrisy this sight, the loss of 
which we so much pity, would appear to be!

The thought occurred to me as I sat down in another room, before a 
girl, blind, deaf, and dumb; destitute of smell; and nearly so of 
taste:  before a fair young creature with every human faculty, and 
hope, and power of goodness and affection, inclosed within her 
delicate frame, and but one outward sense - the sense of touch.  
There she was, before me; built up, as it were, in a marble cell, 
impervious to any ray of light, or particle of sound; with her poor 
white hand peeping through a chink in the wall, beckoning to some 
good man for help, that an Immortal soul might be awakened.

Long before I looked upon her, the help had come.  Her face was 
radiant with intelligence and pleasure.  Her hair, braided by her 
own hands, was bound about a head, whose intellectual capacity and 
development were beautifully expressed in its graceful outline, and 
its broad open brow; her dress, arranged by herself, was a pattern 
of neatness and simplicity; the work she had knitted, lay beside 
her; her writing-book was on the desk she leaned upon. - From the 
mournful ruin of such bereavement, there had slowly risen up this 
gentle, tender, guileless, grateful-hearted being.

Like other inmates of that house, she had a green ribbon bound 
round her eyelids.  A doll she had dressed lay near upon the 
ground.  I took it up, and saw that she had made a green fillet 
such as she wore herself, and fastened it about its mimic eyes.

She was seated in a little enclosure, made by school-desks and 
forms, writing her daily journal.  But soon finishing this pursuit, 
she engaged in an animated conversation with a teacher who sat 
beside her.  This was a favourite mistress with the poor pupil.  If 
she could see the face of her fair instructress, she would not love 
her less, I am sure.

I have extracted a few disjointed fragments of her history, from an 
account, written by that one man who has made her what she is.  It 
is a very beautiful and touching narrative; and I wish I could 
present it entire.

Her name is Laura Bridgman.  'She was born in Hanover, New 
Hampshire, on the twenty-first of December, 1829.  She is described 
as having been a very sprightly and pretty infant, with bright blue 
eyes.  She was, however, so puny and feeble until she was a year 
and a half old, that her parents hardly hoped to rear her.  She was 
subject to severe fits, which seemed to rack her frame almost 
beyond her power of endurance:  and life was held by the feeblest 
tenure:  but when a year and a half old, she seemed to rally; the 
dangerous symptoms subsided; and at twenty months old, she was 
perfectly well.

'Then her mental powers, hitherto stinted in their growth, rapidly 
developed themselves; and during the four months of health which 
she enjoyed, she appears (making due allowance for a fond mother's 
account) to have displayed a considerable degree of intelligence.

'But suddenly she sickened again; her disease raged with great 
violence during five weeks, when her eyes and ears were inflamed, 
suppurated, and their contents were discharged.  But though sight 
and hearing were gone for ever, the poor child's sufferings were 
not ended.  The fever raged during seven weeks; for five months she 
was kept in bed in a darkened room; it was a year before she could 
walk unsupported, and two years before she could sit up all day.  
It was now observed that her sense of smell was almost entirely 
destroyed; and, consequently, that her taste was much blunted.

'It was not until four years of age that the poor child's bodily 
health seemed restored, and she was able to enter upon her 
apprenticeship of life and the world.

'But what a situation was hers!  The darkness and the silence of 
the tomb were around her:  no mother's smile called forth her 
answering smile, no father's voice taught her to imitate his 
sounds:- they, brothers and sisters, were but forms of matter which 
resisted her touch, but which differed not from the furniture of 
the house, save in warmth, and in the power of locomotion; and not 
even in these respects from the dog and the cat.

'But the immortal spirit which had been implanted within her could 
not die, nor be maimed nor mutilated; and though most of its 
avenues of communication with the world were cut off, it began to 
manifest itself through the others.  As soon as she could walk, she 
began to explore the room, and then the house; she became familiar 
with the form, density, weight, and heat, of every article she 
could lay her hands upon.  She followed her mother, and felt her 
hands and arms, as she was occupied about the house; and her 
disposition to imitate, led her to repeat everything herself.  She 
even learned to sew a little, and to knit.'

The reader will scarcely need to be told, however, that the 
opportunities of communicating with her, were very, very limited; 
and that the moral effects of her wretched state soon began to 
appear.  Those who cannot be enlightened by reason, can only be 
controlled by force; and this, coupled with her great privations, 
must soon have reduced her to a worse condition than that of the 
beasts that perish, but for timely and unhoped-for aid.

'At this time, I was so fortunate as to hear of the child, and 
immediately hastened to Hanover to see her.  I found her with a 
well-formed figure; a strongly-marked, nervous-sanguine 
temperament; a large and beautifully-shaped head; and the whole 
system in healthy action.  The parents were easily induced to 
consent to her coming to Boston, and on the 4th of October, 1837, 
they brought her to the Institution.

'For a while, she was much bewildered; and after waiting about two 
weeks, until she became acquainted with her new locality, and 
somewhat familiar with the inmates, the attempt was made to give 
her knowledge of arbitrary signs, by which she could interchange 
thoughts with others.

'There was one of two ways to be adopted:  either to go on to build 
up a language of signs on the basis of the natural language which 
she had already commenced herself, or to teach her the purely 
arbitrary language in common use:  that is, to give her a sign for 
every individual thing, or to give her a knowledge of letters by 
combination of which she might express her idea of the existence, 
and the mode and condition of existence, of any thing.  The former 
would have been easy, but very ineffectual; the latter seemed very 
difficult, but, if accomplished, very effectual.  I determined 
therefore to try the latter.

'The first experiments were made by taking articles in common use, 
such as knives, forks, spoons, keys, &c., and pasting upon them 
labels with their names printed in raised letters.  These she felt 
very carefully, and soon, of course, distinguished that the crooked 
lines SPOON, differed as much from the crooked lines KEY, as the 
spoon differed from the key in form.

'Then small detached labels, with the same words printed upon them, 
were put into her hands; and she soon observed that they were 
similar to the ones pasted on the articles.'  She showed her 
perception of this similarity by laying the label KEY upon the key, 
and the label SPOON upon the spoon.  She was encouraged here by the 
natural sign of approbation, patting on the head.

'The same process was then repeated with all the articles which she 
could handle; and she very easily learned to place the proper 
labels upon them.  It was evident, however, that the only 
intellectual exercise was that of imitation and memory.  She 
recollected that the label BOOK was placed upon a book, and she 
repeated the process first from imitation, next from memory, with 
only the motive of love of approbation, but apparently without the 
intellectual perception of any relation between the things.

'After a while, instead of labels, the individual letters were 
given to her on detached bits of paper:  they were arranged side by 
side so as to spell BOOK, KEY, &c.; then they were mixed up in a 
heap and a sign was made for her to arrange them herself so as to 
express the words BOOK, KEY, &c.; and she did so.

'Hitherto, the process had been mechanical, and the success about 
as great as teaching a very knowing dog a variety of tricks.  The 
poor child had sat in mute amazement, and patiently imitated 
everything her teacher did; but now the truth began to flash upon 
her:  her intellect began to work:  she perceived that here was a 
way by which she could herself make up a sign of anything that was 
in her own mind, and show it to another mind; and at once her 
countenance lighted up with a human expression:  it was no longer a 
dog, or parrot:  it was an immortal spirit, eagerly seizing upon a 
new link of union with other spirits!  I could almost fix upon the 
moment when this truth dawned upon her mind, and spread its light 
to her countenance; I saw that the great obstacle was overcome; and 
that henceforward nothing but patient and persevering, but plain 
and straightforward, efforts were to be used.

'The result thus far, is quickly related, and easily conceived; but 
not so was the process; for many weeks of apparently unprofitable 
labour were passed before it was effected.

'When it was said above that a sign was made, it was intended to 
say, that the action was performed by her teacher, she feeling his 
hands, and then imitating the motion.

'The next step was to procure a set of metal types, with the 
different letters of the alphabet cast upon their ends; also a 
board, in which were square holes, into which holes she could set 
the types; so that the letters on their ends could alone be felt 
above the surface.

'Then, on any article being handed to her, for instance, a pencil, 
or a watch, she would select the component letters, and arrange 
them on her board, and read them with apparent pleasure.

'She was exercised for several weeks in this way, until her 
vocabulary became extensive; and then the important step was taken 
of teaching her how to represent the different letters by the 
position of her fingers, instead of the cumbrous apparatus of the 
board and types.  She accomplished this speedily and easily, for 
her intellect had begun to work in aid of her teacher, and her 
progress was rapid.

'This was the period, about three months after she had commenced, 
that the first report of her case was made, in which it was stated 
that "she has just learned the manual alphabet, as used by the deaf 
mutes, and it is a subject of delight and wonder to see how 
rapidly, correctly, and eagerly, she goes on with her labours.  Her 
teacher gives her a new object, for instance, a pencil, first lets 
her examine it, and get an idea of its use, then teaches her how to 
spell it by making the signs for the letters with her own fingers:  
the child grasps her hand, and feels her fingers, as the different 
letters are formed; she turns her head a little on one side like a 
person listening closely; her lips are apart; she seems scarcely to 
breathe; and her countenance, at first anxious, gradually changes 
to a smile, as she comprehends the lesson.  She then holds up her 
tiny fingers, and spells the word in the manual alphabet; next, she 
takes her types and arranges her letters; and last, to make sure 
that she is right, she takes the whole of the types composing the 
word, and places them upon or in contact with the pencil, or 
whatever the object may be."

'The whole of the succeeding year was passed in gratifying her 
eager inquiries for the names of every object which she could 
possibly handle; in exercising her in the use of the manual 
alphabet; in extending in every possible way her knowledge of the 
physical relations of things; and in proper care of her health.

'At the end of the year a report of her case was made, from which 
the following is an extract.

'"It has been ascertained beyond the possibility of doubt, that she 
cannot see a ray of light, cannot hear the least sound, and never 
exercises her sense of smell, if she have any.  Thus her mind 
dwells in darkness and stillness, as profound as that of a closed 
tomb at midnight.  Of beautiful sights, and sweet sounds, and 
pleasant odours, she has no conception; nevertheless, she seems as 
happy and playful as a bird or a lamb; and the employment of her 
intellectual faculties, or the acquirement of a new idea, gives her 
a vivid pleasure, which is plainly marked in her expressive 
features.  She never seems to repine, but has all the buoyancy and 
gaiety of childhood.  She is fond of fun and frolic, and when 
playing with the rest of the children, her shrill laugh sounds 
loudest of the group.

'"When left alone, she seems very happy if she have her knitting or 
sewing, and will busy herself for hours; if she have no occupation, 
she evidently amuses herself by imaginary dialogues, or by 
recalling past impressions; she counts with her fingers, or spells 
out names of things which she has recently learned, in the manual 
alphabet of the deaf mutes.  In this lonely self-communion she 
seems to reason, reflect, and argue; if she spell a word wrong with 
the fingers of her right hand, she instantly strikes it with her 
left, as her teacher does, in sign of disapprobation; if right, 
then she pats herself upon the head, and looks pleased.  She 
sometimes purposely spells a word wrong with the left hand, looks 
roguish for a moment and laughs, and then with the right hand 
strikes the left, as if to correct it.

'"During the year she has attained great dexterity in the use of 
the manual alphabet of the deaf mutes; and she spells out the words 
and sentences which she knows, so fast and so deftly, that only 
those accustomed to this language can follow with the eye the rapid 
motions of her fingers.

'"But wonderful as is the rapidity with which she writes her 
thoughts upon the air, still more so is the ease and accuracy with 
which she reads the words thus written by another; grasping their 
hands in hers, and following every movement of their fingers, as 
letter after letter conveys their meaning to her mind.  It is in 
this way that she converses with her blind playmates, and nothing 
can more forcibly show the power of mind in forcing matter to its 
purpose than a meeting between them.  For if great talent and skill 
are necessary for two pantomimes to paint their thoughts and 
feelings by the movements of the body, and the expression of the 
countenance, how much greater the difficulty when darkness shrouds 
them both, and the one can hear no sound.

'"When Laura is walking through a passage-way, with her hands 
spread before her, she knows instantly every one she meets, and 
passes them with a sign of recognition:  but if it be a girl of her 
own age, and especially if it be one of her favourites, there is 
instantly a bright smile of recognition, a twining of arms, a 
grasping of hands, and a swift telegraphing upon the tiny fingers; 
whose rapid evolutions convey the thoughts and feelings from the 
outposts of one mind to those of the other.  There are questions 
and answers, exchanges of joy or sorrow, there are kissings and 
partings, just as between little children with all their senses."

'During this year, and six months after she had left home, her 
mother came to visit her, and the scene of their meeting was an 
interesting one.

'The mother stood some time, gazing with overflowing eyes upon her 
unfortunate child, who, all unconscious of her presence, was 
playing about the room.  Presently Laura ran against her, and at 
once began feeling her hands, examining her dress, and trying to 
find out if she knew her; but not succeeding in this, she turned 
away as from a stranger, and the poor woman could not conceal the 
pang she felt, at finding that her beloved child did not know her.

'She then gave Laura a string of beads which she used to wear at 
home, which were recognised by the child at once, who, with much 
joy, put them around her neck, and sought me eagerly to say she 
understood the string was from her home.

'The mother now sought to caress her, but poor Laura repelled her, 
preferring to be with her acquaintances.

'Another article from home was now given her, and she began to look 
much interested; she examined the stranger much closer, and gave me 
to understand that she knew she came from Hanover; she even endured 
her caresses, but would leave her with indifference at the 
slightest signal.  The distress of the mother was now painful to 
behold; for, although she had feared that she should not be 
recognised, the painful reality of being treated with cold 
indifference by a darling child, was too much for woman's nature to 
bear.

'After a while, on the mother taking hold of her again, a vague 
idea seemed to flit across Laura's mind, that this could not be a 
stranger; she therefore felt her hands very eagerly, while her 
countenance assumed an expression of intense interest; she became 
very pale; and then suddenly red; hope seemed struggling with doubt 
and anxiety, and never were contending emotions more strongly 
painted upon the human face:  at this moment of painful 
uncertainty, the mother drew her close to her side, and kissed her 
fondly, when at once the truth flashed upon the child, and all 
mistrust and anxiety disappeared from her face, as with an 
expression of exceeding joy she eagerly nestled to the bosom of her 
parent, and yielded herself to her fond embraces.

'After this, the beads were all unheeded; the playthings which were 
offered to her were utterly disregarded; her playmates, for whom 
but a moment before she gladly left the stranger, now vainly strove 
to pull her from her mother; and though she yielded her usual 
instantaneous obedience to my signal to follow me, it was evidently 
with painful reluctance.  She clung close to me, as if bewildered 
and fearful; and when, after a moment, I took her to her mother, 
she sprang to her arms, and clung to her with eager joy.

'The subsequent parting between them, showed alike the affection, 
the intelligence, and the resolution of the child.

'Laura accompanied her mother to the door, clinging close to her 
all the way, until they arrived at the threshold, where she paused, 
and felt around, to ascertain who was near her.  Perceiving the 
matron, of whom she is very fond, she grasped her with one hand, 
holding on convulsively to her mother with the other; and thus she 
stood for a moment:  then she dropped her mother's hand; put her 
handkerchief to her eyes; and turning round, clung sobbing to the 
matron; while her mother departed, with emotions as deep as those 
of her child.

* * * * * *

'It has been remarked in former reports, that she can distinguish 
different degrees of intellect in others, and that she soon 
regarded, almost with contempt, a new-comer, when, after a few 
days, she discovered her weakness of mind.  This unamiable part of 
her character has been more strongly developed during the past 
year.

'She chooses for her friends and companions, those children who are 
intelligent, and can talk best with her; and she evidently dislikes 
to be with those who are deficient in intellect, unless, indeed, 
she can make them serve her purposes, which she is evidently 
inclined to do.  She takes advantage of them, and makes them wait 
upon her, in a manner that she knows she could not exact of others; 
and in various ways shows her Saxon blood.

'She is fond of having other children noticed and caressed by the 
teachers, and those whom she respects; but this must not be carried 
too far, or she becomes jealous.  She wants to have her share, 
which, if not the lion's, is the greater part; and if she does not 
get it, she says, "MY MOTHER WILL LOVE ME."

'Her tendency to imitation is so strong, that it leads her to 
actions which must be entirely incomprehensible to her, and which 
can give her no other pleasure than the gratification of an 
internal faculty.  She has been known to sit for half an hour, 
holding a book before her sightless eyes, and moving her lips, as 
she has observed seeing people do when reading.

'She one day pretended that her doll was sick; and went through all 
the motions of tending it, and giving it medicine; she then put it 
carefully to bed, and placed a bottle of hot water to its feet, 
laughing all the time most heartily.  When I came home, she 
insisted upon my going to see it, and feel its pulse; and when I 
told her to put a blister on its back, she seemed to enjoy it 
amazingly, and almost screamed with delight.

'Her social feelings, and her affections, are very strong; and when 
she is sitting at work, or at her studies, by the side of one of 
her little friends, she will break off from her task every few 
moments, to hug and kiss them with an earnestness and warmth that 
is touching to behold.

'When left alone, she occupies and apparently amuses herself, and 
seems quite contented; and so strong seems to be the natural 
tendency of thought to put on the garb of language, that she often 
soliloquizes in the FINGER LANGUAGE, slow and tedious as it is.  
But it is only when alone, that she is quiet:  for if she becomes 
sensible of the presence of any one near her, she is restless until 
she can sit close beside them, hold their hand, and converse with 
them by signs.

'In her intellectual character it is pleasing to observe an 
insatiable thirst for knowledge, and a quick perception of the 
relations of things.  In her moral character, it is beautiful to 
behold her continual gladness, her keen enjoyment of existence, her 
expansive love, her unhesitating confidence, her sympathy with 
suffering, her conscientiousness, truthfulness, and hopefulness.'

Such are a few fragments from the simple but most interesting and 
instructive history of Laura Bridgman.  The name of her great 
benefactor and friend, who writes it, is Dr. Howe.  There are not 
many persons, I hope and believe, who, after reading these 
passages, can ever hear that name with indifference.

A further account has been published by Dr. Howe, since the report 
from which I have just quoted.  It describes her rapid mental 
growth and improvement during twelve months more, and brings her 
little history down to the end of last year.  It is very 
remarkable, that as we dream in words, and carry on imaginary 
conversations, in which we speak both for ourselves and for the 
shadows who appear to us in those visions of the night, so she, 
having no words, uses her finger alphabet in her sleep.  And it has 
been ascertained that when her slumber is broken, and is much 
disturbed by dreams, she expresses her thoughts in an irregular and 
confused manner on her fingers:  just as we should murmur and 
mutter them indistinctly, in the like circumstances.

I turned over the leaves of her Diary, and found it written in a 
fair legible square hand, and expressed in terms which were quite 
intelligible without any explanation.  On my saying that I should 
like to see her write again, the teacher who sat beside her, bade 
her, in their language, sign her name upon a slip of paper, twice 
or thrice.  In doing so, I observed that she kept her left hand 
always touching, and following up, her right, in which, of course, 
she held the pen.  No line was indicated by any contrivance, but 
she wrote straight and freely.

She had, until now, been quite unconscious of the presence of 
visitors; but, having her hand placed in that of the gentleman who 
accompanied me, she immediately expressed his name upon her 
teacher's palm.  Indeed her sense of touch is now so exquisite, 
that having been acquainted with a person once, she can recognise 
him or her after almost any interval.  This gentleman had been in 
her company, I believe, but very seldom, and certainly had not seen 
her for many months.  My hand she rejected at once, as she does 
that of any man who is a stranger to her.  But she retained my 
wife's with evident pleasure, kissed her, and examed her dress with 
a girl's curiosity and interest.

She was merry and cheerful, and showed much innocent playfulness in 
her intercourse with her teacher.  Her delight on recognising a 
favourite playfellow and companion - herself a blind girl - who 
silently, and with an equal enjoyment of the coming surprise, took 
a seat beside her, was beautiful to witness.  It elicited from her 
at first, as other slight circumstances did twice or thrice during 
my visit, an uncouth noise which was rather painful to hear.  But 
of her teacher touching her lips, she immediately desisted, and 
embraced her laughingly and affectionately.

I had previously been into another chamber, where a number of blind 
boys were swinging, and climbing, and engaged in various sports.  
They all clamoured, as we entered, to the assistant-master, who 
accompanied us, 'Look at me, Mr. Hart!  Please, Mr. Hart, look at 
me!' evincing, I thought, even in this, an anxiety peculiar to 
their condition, that their little feats of agility should be SEEN.  
Among them was a small laughing fellow, who stood aloof, 
entertaining himself with a gymnastic exercise for bringing the 
arms and chest into play; which he enjoyed mightily; especially 
when, in thrusting out his right arm, he brought it into contact 
with another boy.  Like Laura Bridgman, this young child was deaf, 
and dumb, and blind.

Dr. Howe's account of this pupil's first instruction is so very 
striking, and so intimately connected with Laura herself, that I 
cannot refrain from a short extract.  I may premise that the poor 
boy's name is Oliver Caswell; that he is thirteen years of age; and 
that he was in full possession of all his faculties, until three 
years and four months old.  He was then attacked by scarlet fever; 
in four weeks became deaf; in a few weeks more, blind; in six 
months, dumb.  He showed his anxious sense of this last 
deprivation, by often feeling the lips of other persons when they 
were talking, and then putting his hand upon his own, as if to 
assure himself that he had them in the right position.

'His thirst for knowledge,' says Dr. Howe, 'proclaimed itself as 
soon as he entered the house, by his eager examination of 
everything he could feel or smell in his new location.  For 
instance, treading upon the register of a furnace, he instantly 
stooped down, and began to feel it, and soon discovered the way in 
which the upper plate moved upon the lower one; but this was not 
enough for him, so lying down upon his face, he applied his tongue 
first to one, then to the other, and seemed to discover that they 
were of different kinds of metal.

'His signs were expressive:  and the strictly natural language, 
laughing, crying, sighing, kissing, embracing, &c., was perfect.

'Some of the analogical signs which (guided by his faculty of 
imitation) he had contrived, were comprehensible; such as the 
waving motion of his hand for the motion of a boat, the circular 
one for a wheel, &c.

'The first object was to break up the use of these signs and to 
substitute for them the use of purely arbitrary ones.

'Profiting by the experience I had gained in the other cases, I 
omitted several steps of the process before employed, and commenced 
at once with the finger language.  Taking, therefore, several 
articles having short names, such as key, cup, mug, &c., and with 
Laura for an auxiliary, I sat down, and taking his hand, placed it 
upon one of them, and then with my own, made the letters KEY.  He 
felt my hands eagerly with both of his, and on my repeating the 
process, he evidently tried to imitate the motions of my fingers.  
In a few minutes he contrived to feel the motions of my fingers 
with one hand, and holding out the other he tried to imitate them, 
laughing most heartily when he succeeded.  Laura was by, interested 
even to agitation; and the two presented a singular sight:  her 
face was flushed and anxious, and her fingers twining in among ours 
so closely as to follow every motion, but so slightly as not to 
embarrass them; while Oliver stood attentive, his head a little 
aside, his face turned up, his left hand grasping mine, and his 
right held out:  at every motion of my fingers his countenance 
betokened keen attention; there was an expression of anxiety as he 
tried to imitate the motions; then a smile came stealing out as he 
thought he could do so, and spread into a joyous laugh the moment 
he succeeded, and felt me pat his head, and Laura clap him heartily 
upon the back, and jump up and down in her joy.

'He learned more than a half-dozen letters in half an hour, and 
seemed delighted with his success, at least in gaining approbation.  
His attention then began to flag, and I commenced playing with him.  
It was evident that in all this he had merely been imitating the 
motions of my fingers, and placing his hand upon the key, cup, &c., 
as part of the process, without any perception of the relation 
between the sign and the object.

'When he was tired with play I took him back to the table, and he 
was quite ready to begin again his process of imitation.  He soon 
learned to make the letters for KEY, PEN, PIN; and by having the 
object repeatedly placed in his hand, he at last perceived the 
relation I wished to establish between them.  This was evident, 
because, when I made the letters PIN, or PEN, or CUP, he would 
select the article.

'The perception of this relation was not accompanied by that 
radiant flash of intelligence, and that glow of joy, which marked 
the delightful moment when Laura first perceived it.  I then placed 
all the articles on the table, and going away a little distance 
with the children, placed Oliver's fingers in the positions to 
spell KEY, on which Laura went and brought the article:  the little 
fellow seemed much amused by this, and looked very attentive and 
smiling.  I then caused him to make the letters BREAD, and in an 
instant Laura went and brought him a piece:  he smelled at it; put 
it to his lips; cocked up his head with a most knowing look; seemed 
to reflect a moment; and then laughed outright, as much as to say, 
"Aha!  I understand now how something may be made out of this."

'It was now clear that he had the capacity and inclination to 
learn, that he was a proper subject for instruction, and needed 
only persevering attention.  I therefore put him in the hands of an 
intelligent teacher, nothing doubting of his rapid progress.'

Well may this gentleman call that a delightful moment, in which 
some distant promise of her present state first gleamed upon the 
darkened mind of Laura Bridgman.  Throughout his life, the 
recollection of that moment will be to him a source of pure, 
unfading happiness; nor will it shine less brightly on the evening 
of his days of Noble Usefulness.

The affection which exists between these two - the master and the 
pupil - is as far removed from all ordinary care and regard, as the 
circumstances in which it has had its growth, are apart from the 
common occurrences of life.  He is occupied now, in devising means 
of imparting to her, higher knowledge; and of conveying to her some 
adequate idea of the Great Creator of that universe in which, dark 
and silent and scentless though it be to her, she has such deep 
delight and glad enjoyment.

Ye who have eyes and see not, and have ears and hear not; ye who 
are as the hypocrites of sad countenances, and disfigure your faces 
that ye may seem unto men to fast; learn healthy cheerfulness, and 
mild contentment, from the deaf, and dumb, and blind!  Self-elected 
saints with gloomy brows, this sightless, earless, voiceless child 
may teach you lessons you will do well to follow.  Let that poor 
hand of hers lie gently on your hearts; for there may be something 
in its healing touch akin to that of the Great Master whose 
precepts you misconstrue, whose lessons you pervert, of whose 
charity and sympathy with all the world, not one among you in his 
daily practice knows as much as many of the worst among those 
fallen sinners, to whom you are liberal in nothing but the 
preachment of perdition!

As I rose to quit the room, a pretty little child of one of the 
attendants came running in to greet its father.  For the moment, a 
child with eyes, among the sightless crowd, impressed me almost as 
painfully as the blind boy in the porch had done, two hours ago.  
Ah! how much brighter and more deeply blue, glowing and rich though 
it had been before, was the scene without, contrasting with the 
darkness of so many youthful lives within!

* * * * * *

At SOUTH BOSTON, as it is called, in a situation excellently 
adapted for the purpose, several charitable institutions are 
clustered together.  One of these, is the State Hospital for the 
insane; admirably conducted on those enlightened principles of 
conciliation and kindness, which twenty years ago would have been 
worse than heretical, and which have been acted upon with so much 
success in our own pauper Asylum at Hanwell.  'Evince a desire to 
show some confidence, and repose some trust, even in mad people,' 
said the resident physician, as we walked along the galleries, his 
patients flocking round us unrestrained.  Of those who deny or 
doubt the wisdom of this maxim after witnessing its effects, if 
there be such people still alive, I can only say that I hope I may 
never be summoned as a Juryman on a Commission of Lunacy whereof 
they are the subjects; for I should certainly find them out of 
their senses, on such evidence alone.

Each ward in this institution is shaped like a long gallery or 
hall, with the dormitories of the patients opening from it on 
either hand.  Here they work, read, play at skittles, and other 
games; and when the weather does not admit of their taking exercise 
out of doors, pass the day together.  In one of these rooms, 
seated, calmly, and quite as a matter of course, among a throng of 
mad-women, black and white, were the physician's wife and another 
lady, with a couple of children.  These ladies were graceful and 
handsome; and it was not difficult to perceive at a glance that 
even their presence there, had a highly beneficial influence on the 
patients who were grouped about them.

Leaning her head against the chimney-piece, with a great assumption 
of dignity and refinement of manner, sat an elderly female, in as 
many scraps of finery as Madge Wildfire herself.  Her head in 
particular was so strewn with scraps of gauze and cotton and bits 
of paper, and had so many queer odds and ends stuck all about it, 
that it looked like a bird's-nest.  She was radiant with imaginary 
jewels; wore a rich pair of undoubted gold spectacles; and 
gracefully dropped upon her lap, as we approached, a very old 
greasy newspaper, in which I dare say she had been reading an 
account of her own presentation at some Foreign Court.

I have been thus particular in describing her, because she will 
serve to exemplify the physician's manner of acquiring and 
retaining the confidence of his patients.

'This,' he said aloud, taking me by the hand, and advancing to the 
fantastic figure with great politeness - not raising her suspicions 
by the slightest look or whisper, or any kind of aside, to me:  
'This lady is the hostess of this mansion, sir.  It belongs to her.  
Nobody else has anything whatever to do with it.  It is a large 
establishment, as you see, and requires a great number of 
attendants.  She lives, you observe, in the very first style.  She 
is kind enough to receive my visits, and to permit my wife and 
family to reside here; for which it is hardly necessary to say, we 
are much indebted to her.  She is exceedingly courteous, you 
perceive,' on this hint she bowed condescendingly, 'and will permit 
me to have the pleasure of introducing you:  a gentleman from 
England, Ma'am:  newly arrived from England, after a very 
tempestuous passage:  Mr. Dickens, - the lady of the house!'

We exchanged the most dignified salutations with profound gravity 
and respect, and so went on.  The rest of the madwomen seemed to 
understand the joke perfectly (not only in this case, but in all 
the others, except their own), and be highly amused by it.  The 
nature of their several kinds of insanity was made known to me in 
the same way, and we left each of them in high good humour.  Not 
only is a thorough confidence established, by those means, between 
the physician and patient, in respect of the nature and extent of 
their hallucinations, but it is easy to understand that 
opportunities are afforded for seizing any moment of reason, to 
startle them by placing their own delusion before them in its most 
incongruous and ridiculous light.

Every patient in this asylum sits down to dinner every day with a 
knife and fork; and in the midst of them sits the gentleman, whose 
manner of dealing with his charges, I have just described.  At 
every meal, moral influence alone restrains the more violent among 
them from cutting the throats of the rest; but the effect of that 
influence is reduced to an absolute certainty, and is found, even 
as a means of restraint, to say nothing of it as a means of cure, a 
hundred times more efficacious than all the strait-waistcoats, 
fetters, and handcuffs, that ignorance, prejudice, and cruelty have 
manufactured since the creation of the world.

In the labour department, every patient is as freely trusted with 
the tools of his trade as if he were a sane man.  In the garden, 
and on the farm, they work with spades, rakes, and hoes.  For 
amusement, they walk, run, fish, paint, read, and ride out to take 
the air in carriages provided for the purpose.  They have among 
themselves a sewing society to make clothes for the poor, which 
holds meetings, passes resolutions, never comes to fisty-cuffs or 
bowie-knives as sane assemblies have been known to do elsewhere; 
and conducts all its proceedings with the greatest decorum.  The 
irritability, which would otherwise be expended on their own flesh, 
clothes, and furniture, is dissipated in these pursuits.  They are 
cheerful, tranquil, and healthy.

Once a week they have a ball, in which the Doctor and his family, 
with all the nurses and attendants, take an active part.  Dances 
and marches are performed alternately, to the enlivening strains of 
a piano; and now and then some gentleman or lady (whose proficiency 
has been previously ascertained) obliges the company with a song:  
nor does it ever degenerate, at a tender crisis, into a screech or 
howl; wherein, I must confess, I should have thought the danger 
lay.  At an early hour they all meet together for these festive 
purposes; at eight o'clock refreshments are served; and at nine 
they separate.

Immense politeness and good breeding are observed throughout.  They 
all take their tone from the Doctor; and he moves a very 
Chesterfield among the company.  Like other assemblies, these 
entertainments afford a fruitful topic of conversation among the 
ladies for some days; and the gentlemen are so anxious to shine on 
these occasions, that they have been sometimes found 'practising 
their steps' in private, to cut a more distinguished figure in the 
dance.

It is obvious that one great feature of this system, is the 
inculcation and encouragement, even among such unhappy persons, of 
a decent self-respect.  Something of the same spirit pervades all 
the Institutions at South Boston.

There is the House of Industry.  In that branch of it, which is 
devoted to the reception of old or otherwise helpless paupers, 
these words are painted on the walls:  'WORTHY OF NOTICE.  SELF-
GOVERNMENT, QUIETUDE, AND PEACE, ARE BLESSINGS.'  It is not assumed 
and taken for granted that being there they must be evil-disposed 
and wicked people, before whose vicious eyes it is necessary to 
flourish threats and harsh restraints.  They are met at the very 
threshold with this mild appeal.  All within-doors is very plain 
and simple, as it ought to be, but arranged with a view to peace 
and comfort.  It costs no more than any other plan of arrangement, 
but it speaks an amount of consideration for those who are reduced 
to seek a shelter there, which puts them at once upon their 
gratitude and good behaviour.  Instead of being parcelled out in 
great, long, rambling wards, where a certain amount of weazen life 
may mope, and pine, and shiver, all day long, the building is 
divided into separate rooms, each with its share of light and air.  
In these, the better kind of paupers live.  They have a motive for 
exertion and becoming pride, in the desire to make these little 
chambers comfortable and decent.

I do not remember one but it was clean and neat, and had its plant 
or two upon the window-sill, or row of crockery upon the shelf, or 
small display of coloured prints upon the whitewashed wall, or, 
perhaps, its wooden clock behind the door.

The orphans and young children are in an adjoining building 
separate from this, but a part of the same Institution.  Some are 
such little creatures, that the stairs are of Lilliputian 
measurement, fitted to their tiny strides.  The same consideration 
for their years and weakness is expressed in their very seats, 
which are perfect curiosities, and look like articles of furniture 
for a pauper doll's-house.  I can imagine the glee of our Poor Law 
Commissioners at the notion of these seats having arms and backs; 
but small spines being of older date than their occupation of the 
Board-room at Somerset House, I thought even this provision very 
merciful and kind.

Here again, I was greatly pleased with the inscriptions on the 
wall, which were scraps of plain morality, easily remembered and 
understood:  such as 'Love one another' - 'God remembers the 
smallest creature in his creation:' and straightforward advice of 
that nature.  The books and tasks of these smallest of scholars, 
were adapted, in the same judicious manner, to their childish 
powers.  When we had examined these lessons, four morsels of girls 
(of whom one was blind) sang a little song, about the merry month 
of May, which I thought (being extremely dismal) would have suited 
an English November better.  That done, we went to see their 
sleeping-rooms on the floor above, in which the arrangements were 
no less excellent and gentle than those we had seen below.  And 
after observing that the teachers were of a class and character 
well suited to the spirit of the place, I took leave of the infants 
with a lighter heart than ever I have taken leave of pauper infants 
yet.

Connected with the House of Industry, there is also an Hospital, 
which was in the best order, and had, I am glad to say, many beds 
unoccupied.  It had one fault, however, which is common to all 
American interiors:  the presence of the eternal, accursed, 
suffocating, red-hot demon of a stove, whose breath would blight 
the purest air under Heaven.

There are two establishments for boys in this same neighbourhood.  
One is called the Boylston school, and is an asylum for neglected 
and indigent boys who have committed no crime, but who in the 
ordinary course of things would very soon be purged of that 
distinction if they were not taken from the hungry streets and sent 
here.  The other is a House of Reformation for Juvenile Offenders.  
They are both under the same roof, but the two classes of boys 
never come in contact.

The Boylston boys, as may be readily supposed, have very much the 
advantage of the others in point of personal appearance.  They were 
in their school-room when I came upon them, and answered correctly, 
without book, such questions as where was England; how far was it; 
what was its population; its capital city; its form of government; 
and so forth.  They sang a song too, about a farmer sowing his 
seed:  with corresponding action at such parts as ''tis thus he 
sows,' 'he turns him round,' 'he claps his hands;' which gave it 
greater interest for them, and accustomed them to act together, in 
an orderly manner.  They appeared exceedingly well-taught, and not 
better taught than fed; for a more chubby-looking full-waistcoated 
set of boys, I never saw.

The juvenile offenders had not such pleasant faces by a great deal, 
and in this establishment there were many boys of colour.  I saw 
them first at their work (basket-making, and the manufacture of 
palm-leaf hats), afterwards in their school, where they sang a 
chorus in praise of Liberty:  an odd, and, one would think, rather 
aggravating, theme for prisoners.  These boys are divided into four 
classes, each denoted by a numeral, worn on a badge upon the arm.  
On the arrival of a new-comer, he is put into the fourth or lowest 
class, and left, by good behaviour, to work his way up into the 
first.  The design and object of this Institution is to reclaim the 
youthful criminal by firm but kind and judicious treatment; to make 
his prison a place of purification and improvement, not of 
demoralisation and corruption; to impress upon him that there is 
but one path, and that one sober industry, which can ever lead him 
to happiness; to teach him how it may be trodden, if his footsteps 
have never yet been led that way; and to lure him back to it if 
they have strayed:  in a word, to snatch him from destruction, and 
restore him to society a penitent and useful member.  The 
importance of such an establishment, in every point of view, and 
with reference to every consideration of humanity and social 
policy, requires no comment.

One other establishment closes the catalogue.  It is the House of 
Correction for the State, in which silence is strictly maintained, 
but where the prisoners have the comfort and mental relief of 
seeing each other, and of working together.  This is the improved 
system of Prison Discipline which we have imported into England, 
and which has been in successful operation among us for some years 
past.

America, as a new and not over-populated country, has in all her 
prisons, the one great advantage, of being enabled to find useful 
and profitable work for the inmates; whereas, with us, the 
prejudice against prison labour is naturally very strong, and 
almost insurmountable, when honest men who have not offended 
against the laws are frequently doomed to seek employment in vain.  
Even in the United States, the principle of bringing convict labour 
and free labour into a competition which must obviously be to the 
disadvantage of the latter, has already found many opponents, whose 
number is not likely to diminish with access of years.

For this very reason though, our best prisons would seem at the 
first glance to be better conducted than those of America.  The 
treadmill is conducted with little or no noise; five hundred men 
may pick oakum in the same room, without a sound; and both kinds of 
labour admit of such keen and vigilant superintendence, as will 
render even a word of personal communication amongst the prisoners 
almost impossible.  On the other hand, the noise of the loom, the 
forge, the carpenter's hammer, or the stonemason's saw, greatly 
favour those opportunities of intercourse - hurried and brief no 
doubt, but opportunities still - which these several kinds of work, 
by rendering it necessary for men to be employed very near to each 
other, and often side by side, without any barrier or partition 
between them, in their very nature present.  A visitor, too, 
requires to reason and reflect a little, before the sight of a 
number of men engaged in ordinary labour, such as he is accustomed 
to out of doors, will impress him half as strongly as the 
contemplation of the same persons in the same place and garb would, 
if they were occupied in some task, marked and degraded everywhere 
as belonging only to felons in jails.  In an American state prison 
or house of correction, I found it difficult at first to persuade 
myself that I was really in a jail:  a place of ignominious 
punishment and endurance.  And to this hour I very much question 
whether the humane boast that it is not like one, has its root in 
the true wisdom or philosophy of the matter.

I hope I may not be misunderstood on this subject, for it is one in 
which I take a strong and deep interest.  I incline as little to 
the sickly feeling which makes every canting lie or maudlin speech 
of a notorious criminal a subject of newspaper report and general 
sympathy, as I do to those good old customs of the good old times 
which made England, even so recently as in the reign of the Third 
King George, in respect of her criminal code and her prison 
regulations, one of the most bloody-minded and barbarous countries 
on the earth.  If I thought it would do any good to the rising 
generation, I would cheerfully give my consent to the disinterment 
of the bones of any genteel highwayman (the more genteel, the more 
cheerfully), and to their exposure, piecemeal, on any sign-post, 
gate, or gibbet, that might be deemed a good elevation for the 
purpose.  My reason is as well convinced that these gentry were as 
utterly worthless and debauched villains, as it is that the laws 
and jails hardened them in their evil courses, or that their 
wonderful escapes were effected by the prison-turnkeys who, in 
those admirable days, had always been felons themselves, and were, 
to the last, their bosom-friends and pot-companions.  At the same 
time I know, as all men do or should, that the subject of Prison 
Discipline is one of the highest importance to any community; and 
that in her sweeping reform and bright example to other countries 
on this head, America has shown great wisdom, great benevolence, 
and exalted policy.  In contrasting her system with that which we 
have modelled upon it, I merely seek to show that with all its 
drawbacks, ours has some advantages of its own.

The House of Correction which has led to these remarks, is not 
walled, like other prisons, but is palisaded round about with tall 
rough stakes, something after the manner of an enclosure for 
keeping elephants in, as we see it represented in Eastern prints 
and pictures.  The prisoners wear a parti-coloured dress; and those 
who are sentenced to hard labour, work at nail-making, or stone-
cutting.  When I was there, the latter class of labourers were 
employed upon the stone for a new custom-house in course of 
erection at Boston.  They appeared to shape it skilfully and with 
expedition, though there were very few among them (if any) who had 
not acquired the art within the prison gates.

The women, all in one large room, were employed in making light 
clothing, for New Orleans and the Southern States.  They did their 
work in silence like the men; and like them were over-looked by the 
person contracting for their labour, or by some agent of his 
appointment.  In addition to this, they are every moment liable to 
be visited by the prison officers appointed for that purpose.

The arrangements for cooking, washing of clothes, and so forth, are 
much upon the plan of those I have seen at home.  Their mode of 
bestowing the prisoners at night (which is of general adoption) 
differs from ours, and is both simple and effective.  In the centre 
of a lofty area, lighted by windows in the four walls, are five 
tiers of cells, one above the other; each tier having before it a 
light iron gallery, attainable by stairs of the same construction 
and material:  excepting the lower one, which is on the ground.  
Behind these, back to back with them and facing the opposite wall, 
are five corresponding rows of cells, accessible by similar means:  
so that supposing the prisoners locked up in their cells, an 
officer stationed on the ground, with his back to the wall, has 
half their number under his eye at once; the remaining half being 
equally under the observation of another officer on the opposite 
side; and all in one great apartment.  Unless this watch be 
corrupted or sleeping on his post, it is impossible for a man to 
escape; for even in the event of his forcing the iron door of his 
cell without noise (which is exceedingly improbable), the moment he 
appears outside, and steps into that one of the five galleries on 
which it is situated, he must be plainly and fully visible to the 
officer below.  Each of these cells holds a small truckle bed, in 
which one prisoner sleeps; never more.  It is small, of course; and 
the door being not solid, but grated, and without blind or curtain, 
the prisoner within is at all times exposed to the observation and 
inspection of any guard who may pass along that tier at any hour or 
minute of the night.  Every day, the prisoners receive their 
dinner, singly, through a trap in the kitchen wall; and each man 
carries his to his sleeping cell to eat it, where he is locked up, 
alone, for that purpose, one hour.  The whole of this arrangement 
struck me as being admirable; and I hope that the next new prison 
we erect in England may be built on this plan.

I was given to understand that in this prison no swords or fire-
arms, or even cudgels, are kept; nor is it probable that, so long 
as its present excellent management continues, any weapon, 
offensive or defensive, will ever be required within its bounds.

Such are the Institutions at South Boston!  In all of them, the 
unfortunate or degenerate citizens of the State are carefully 
instructed in their duties both to God and man; are surrounded by 
all reasonable means of comfort and happiness that their condition 
will admit of; are appealed to, as members of the great human 
family, however afflicted, indigent, or fallen; are ruled by the 
strong Heart, and not by the strong (though immeasurably weaker) 
Hand.  I have described them at some length; firstly, because their 
worth demanded it; and secondly, because I mean to take them for a 
model, and to content myself with saying of others we may come to, 
whose design and purpose are the same, that in this or that respect 
they practically fail, or differ.

I wish by this account of them, imperfect in its execution, but in 
its just intention, honest, I could hope to convey to my readers 
one-hundredth part of the gratification, the sights I have 
described, afforded me.

* * * * * *

To an Englishman, accustomed to the paraphernalia of Westminster 
Hall, an American Court of Law is as odd a sight as, I suppose, an 
English Court of Law would be to an American.  Except in the 
Supreme Court at Washington (where the judges wear a plain black 
robe), there is no such thing as a wig or gown connected with the 
administration of justice.  The gentlemen of the bar being 
barristers and attorneys too (for there is no division of those 
functions as in England) are no more removed from their clients 
than attorneys in our Court for the Relief of Insolvent Debtors 
are, from theirs.  The jury are quite at home, and make themselves 
as comfortable as circumstances will permit.  The witness is so 
little elevated above, or put aloof from, the crowd in the court, 
that a stranger entering during a pause in the proceedings would 
find it difficult to pick him out from the rest.  And if it chanced 
to be a criminal trial, his eyes, in nine cases out of ten, would 
wander to the dock in search of the prisoner, in vain; for that 
gentleman would most likely be lounging among the most 
distinguished ornaments of the legal profession, whispering 
suggestions in his counsel's ear, or making a toothpick out of an 
old quill with his penknife.

I could not but notice these differences, when I visited the courts 
at Boston.  I was much surprised at first, too, to observe that the 
counsel who interrogated the witness under examination at the time, 
did so SITTING.  But seeing that he was also occupied in writing 
down the answers, and remembering that he was alone and had no 
'junior,' I quickly consoled myself with the reflection that law 
was not quite so expensive an article here, as at home; and that 
the absence of sundry formalities which we regard as indispensable, 
had doubtless a very favourable influence upon the bill of costs.

In every Court, ample and commodious provision is made for the 
accommodation of the citizens.  This is the case all through 
America.  In every Public Institution, the right of the people to 
attend, and to have an interest in the proceedings, is most fully 
and distinctly recognised.  There are no grim door-keepers to dole 
out their tardy civility by the sixpenny-worth; nor is there, I 
sincerely believe, any insolence of office of any kind.  Nothing 
national is exhibited for money; and no public officer is a 
showman.  We have begun of late years to imitate this good example.  
I hope we shall continue to do so; and that in the fulness of time, 
even deans and chapters may be converted.

In the civil court an action was trying, for damages sustained in 
some accident upon a railway.  The witnesses had been examined, and 
counsel was addressing the jury.  The learned gentleman (like a few 
of his English brethren) was desperately long-winded, and had a 
remarkable capacity of saying the same thing over and over again.  
His great theme was 'Warren the ENGINE driver,' whom he pressed 
into the service of every sentence he uttered.  I listened to him 
for about a quarter of an hour; and, coming out of court at the 
expiration of that time, without the faintest ray of enlightenment 
as to the merits of the case, felt as if I were at home again.

In the prisoner's cell, waiting to be examined by the magistrate on 
a charge of theft, was a boy.  This lad, instead of being committed 
to a common jail, would be sent to the asylum at South Boston, and 
there taught a trade; and in the course of time he would be bound 
apprentice to some respectable master.  Thus, his detection in this 
offence, instead of being the prelude to a life of infamy and a 
miserable death, would lead, there was a reasonable hope, to his 
being reclaimed from vice, and becoming a worthy member of society.

I am by no means a wholesale admirer of our legal solemnities, many 
of which impress me as being exceedingly ludicrous.  Strange as it 
may seem too, there is undoubtedly a degree of protection in the 
wig and gown - a dismissal of individual responsibility in dressing 
for the part - which encourages that insolent bearing and language, 
and that gross perversion of the office of a pleader for The Truth, 
so frequent in our courts of law.  Still, I cannot help doubting 
whether America, in her desire to shake off the absurdities and 
abuses of the old system, may not have gone too far into the 
opposite extreme; and whether it is not desirable, especially in 
the small community of a city like this, where each man knows the 
other, to surround the administration of justice with some 
artificial barriers against the 'Hail fellow, well met' deportment 
of everyday life.  All the aid it can have in the very high 
character and ability of the Bench, not only here but elsewhere, it 
has, and well deserves to have; but it may need something more:  
not to impress the thoughtful and the well-informed, but the 
ignorant and heedless; a class which includes some prisoners and 
many witnesses.  These institutions were established, no doubt, 
upon the principle that those who had so large a share in making 
the laws, would certainly respect them.  But experience has proved 
this hope to be fallacious; for no men know better than the judges 
of America, that on the occasion of any great popular excitement 
the law is powerless, and cannot, for the time, assert its own 
supremacy.

The tone of society in Boston is one of perfect politeness, 
courtesy, and good breeding.  The ladies are unquestionably very 
beautiful - in face:  but there I am compelled to stop.  Their 
education is much as with us; neither better nor worse.  I had 
heard some very marvellous stories in this respect; but not 
believing them, was not disappointed.  Blue ladies there are, in 
Boston; but like philosophers of that colour and sex in most other 
latitudes, they rather desire to be thought superior than to be so.  
Evangelical ladies there are, likewise, whose attachment to the 
forms of religion, and horror of theatrical entertainments, are 
most exemplary.  Ladies who have a passion for attending lectures 
are to be found among all classes and all conditions.  In the kind 
of provincial life which prevails in cities such as this, the 
Pulpit has great influence.  The peculiar province of the Pulpit in 
New England (always excepting the Unitarian Ministry) would appear 
to be the denouncement of all innocent and rational amusements.  
The church, the chapel, and the lecture-room, are the only means of 
excitement excepted; and to the church, the chapel, and the 
lecture-room, the ladies resort in crowds.

Wherever religion is resorted to, as a strong drink, and as an 
escape from the dull monotonous round of home, those of its 
ministers who pepper the highest will be the surest to please.  
They who strew the Eternal Path with the greatest amount of 
brimstone, and who most ruthlessly tread down the flowers and 
leaves that grow by the wayside, will be voted the most righteous; 
and they who enlarge with the greatest pertinacity on the 
difficulty of getting into heaven, will be considered by all true 
believers certain of going there:  though it would be hard to say 
by what process of reasoning this conclusion is arrived at.  It is 
so at home, and it is so abroad.  With regard to the other means of 
excitement, the Lecture, it has at least the merit of being always 
new.  One lecture treads so quickly on the heels of another, that 
none are remembered; and the course of this month may be safely 
repeated next, with its charm of novelty unbroken, and its interest 
unabated.

The fruits of the earth have their growth in corruption.  Out of 
the rottenness of these things, there has sprung up in Boston a 
sect of philosophers known as Transcendentalists.  On inquiring 
what this appellation might be supposed to signify, I was given to 
understand that whatever was unintelligible would be certainly 
transcendental.  Not deriving much comfort from this elucidation, I 
pursued the inquiry still further, and found that the 
Transcendentalists are followers of my friend Mr. Carlyle, or I 
should rather say, of a follower of his, Mr. Ralph Waldo Emerson.  
This gentleman has written a volume of Essays, in which, among much 
that is dreamy and fanciful (if he will pardon me for saying so), 
there is much more that is true and manly, honest and bold.  
Transcendentalism has its occasional vagaries (what school has 
not?), but it has good healthful qualities in spite of them; not 
least among the number a hearty disgust of Cant, and an aptitude to 
detect her in all the million varieties of her everlasting 
wardrobe.  And therefore if I were a Bostonian, I think I would be 
a Transcendentalist.

The only preacher I heard in Boston was Mr. Taylor, who addresses 
himself peculiarly to seamen, and who was once a mariner himself.  
I found his chapel down among the shipping, in one of the narrow, 
old, water-side streets, with a gay blue flag waving freely from 
its roof.  In the gallery opposite to the pulpit were a little 
choir of male and female singers, a violoncello, and a violin.  The 
preacher already sat in the pulpit, which was raised on pillars, 
and ornamented behind him with painted drapery of a lively and 
somewhat theatrical appearance.  He looked a weather-beaten hard-
featured man, of about six or eight and fifty; with deep lines 
graven as it were into his face, dark hair, and a stern, keen eye.  
Yet the general character of his countenance was pleasant and 
agreeable.  The service commenced with a hymn, to which succeeded 
an extemporary prayer.  It had the fault of frequent repetition, 
incidental to all such prayers; but it was plain and comprehensive 
in its doctrines, and breathed a tone of general sympathy and 
charity, which is not so commonly a characteristic of this form of 
address to the Deity as it might be.  That done he opened his 
discourse, taking for his text a passage from the Song of Solomon, 
laid upon the desk before the commencement of the service by some 
unknown member of the congregation:  'Who is this coming up from 
the wilderness, leaning on the arm of her beloved!'

He handled his text in all kinds of ways, and twisted it into all 
manner of shapes; but always ingeniously, and with a rude 
eloquence, well adapted to the comprehension of his hearers.  
Indeed if I be not mistaken, he studied their sympathies and 
understandings much more than the display of his own powers.  His 
imagery was all drawn from the sea, and from the incidents of a 
seaman's life; and was often remarkably good.  He spoke to them of 
'that glorious man, Lord Nelson,' and of Collingwood; and drew 
nothing in, as the saying is, by the head and shoulders, but 
brought it to bear upon his purpose, naturally, and with a sharp 
mind to its effect.  Sometimes, when much excited with his subject, 
he had an odd way - compounded of John Bunyan, and Balfour of 
Burley - of taking his great quarto Bible under his arm and pacing 
up and down the pulpit with it; looking steadily down, meantime, 
into the midst of the congregation.  Thus, when he applied his text 
to the first assemblage of his hearers, and pictured the wonder of 
the church at their presumption in forming a congregation among 
themselves, he stopped short with his Bible under his arm in the 
manner I have described, and pursued his discourse after this 
manner:

'Who are these - who are they - who are these fellows? where do 
they come from?  Where are they going to? - Come from!  What's the 
answer?' - leaning out of the pulpit, and pointing downward with 
his right hand:  'From below!' - starting back again, and looking 
at the sailors before him:  'From below, my brethren.  From under 
the hatches of sin, battened down above you by the evil one.  
That's where you came from!' - a walk up and down the pulpit:  'and 
where are you going' - stopping abruptly:  'where are you going?  
Aloft!' - very softly, and pointing upward:  'Aloft!' - louder:  
'aloft!' - louder still:  'That's where you are going - with a fair 
wind, - all taut and trim, steering direct for Heaven in its glory, 
where there are no storms or foul weather, and where the wicked 
cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest.' - Another walk:  
'That's where you're going to, my friends.  That's it.  That's the 
place.  That's the port.  That's the haven.  It's a blessed harbour 
- still water there, in all changes of the winds and tides; no 
driving ashore upon the rocks, or slipping your cables and running 
out to sea, there:  Peace - Peace - Peace - all peace!' - Another 
walk, and patting the Bible under his left arm:  'What!  These 
fellows are coming from the wilderness, are they?  Yes.  From the 
dreary, blighted wilderness of Iniquity, whose only crop is Death.  
But do they lean upon anything - do they lean upon nothing, these 
poor seamen?' - Three raps upon the Bible:  'Oh yes. - Yes. - They 
lean upon the arm of their Beloved' - three more raps:  'upon the 
arm of their Beloved' - three more, and a walk:  'Pilot, guiding-
star, and compass, all in one, to all hands - here it is' - three 
more:  'Here it is.  They can do their seaman's duty manfully, and 
be easy in their minds in the utmost peril and danger, with this' - 
two more:  'They can come, even these poor fellows can come, from 
the wilderness leaning on the arm of their Beloved, and go up - up 
- up!' - raising his hand higher, and higher, at every repetition 
of the word, so that he stood with it at last stretched above his 
head, regarding them in a strange, rapt manner, and pressing the 
book triumphantly to his breast, until he gradually subsided into 
some other portion of his discourse.

I have cited this, rather as an instance of the preacher's 
eccentricities than his merits, though taken in connection with his 
look and manner, and the character of his audience, even this was 
striking.  It is possible, however, that my favourable impression 
of him may have been greatly influenced and strengthened, firstly, 
by his impressing upon his hearers that the true observance of 
religion was not inconsistent with a cheerful deportment and an 
exact discharge of the duties of their station, which, indeed, it 
scrupulously required of them; and secondly, by his cautioning them 
not to set up any monopoly in Paradise and its mercies.  I never 
heard these two points so wisely touched (if indeed I have ever 
heard them touched at all), by any preacher of that kind before.

Having passed the time I spent in Boston, in making myself 
acquainted with these things, in settling the course I should take 
in my future travels, and in mixing constantly with its society, I 
am not aware that I have any occasion to prolong this chapter.  
Such of its social customs as I have not mentioned, however, may be 
told in a very few words.

The usual dinner-hour is two o'clock.  A dinner party takes place 
at five; and at an evening party, they seldom sup later than 
eleven; so that it goes hard but one gets home, even from a rout, 
by midnight.  I never could find out any difference between a party 
at Boston and a party in London, saving that at the former place 
all assemblies are held at more rational hours; that the 
conversation may possibly be a little louder and more cheerful; and 
a guest is usually expected to ascend to the very top of the house 
to take his cloak off; that he is certain to see, at every dinner, 
an unusual amount of poultry on the table; and at every supper, at 
least two mighty bowls of hot stewed oysters, in any one of which a 
half-grown Duke of Clarence might be smothered easily.

There are two theatres in Boston, of good size and construction, 
but sadly in want of patronage.  The few ladies who resort to them, 
sit, as of right, in the front rows of the boxes.

The bar is a large room with a stone floor, and there people stand 
and smoke, and lounge about, all the evening:  dropping in and out 
as the humour takes them.  There too the stranger is initiated into 
the mysteries of Gin-sling, Cock-tail, Sangaree, Mint Julep, 
Sherry-cobbler, Timber Doodle, and other rare drinks.  The house is 
full of boarders, both married and single, many of whom sleep upon 
the premises, and contract by the week for their board and lodging:  
the charge for which diminishes as they go nearer the sky to roost.  
A public table is laid in a very handsome hall for breakfast, and 
for dinner, and for supper.  The party sitting down together to 
these meals will vary in number from one to two hundred:  sometimes 
more.  The advent of each of these epochs in the day is proclaimed 
by an awful gong, which shakes the very window-frames as it 
reverberates through the house, and horribly disturbs nervous 
foreigners.  There is an ordinary for ladies, and an ordinary for 
gentlemen.

In our private room the cloth could not, for any earthly 
consideration, have been laid for dinner without a huge glass dish 
of cranberries in the middle of the table; and breakfast would have 
been no breakfast unless the principal dish were a deformed beef-
steak with a great flat bone in the centre, swimming in hot butter, 
and sprinkled with the very blackest of all possible pepper.  Our 
bedroom was spacious and airy, but (like every bedroom on this side 
of the Atlantic) very bare of furniture, having no curtains to the 
French bedstead or to the window.  It had one unusual luxury, 
however, in the shape of a wardrobe of painted wood, something 
smaller than an English watch-box; or if this comparison should be 
insufficient to convey a just idea of its dimensions, they may be 
estimated from the fact of my having lived for fourteen days and 
nights in the firm belief that it was a shower-bath.



CHAPTER IV - AN AMERICAN RAILROAD.  LOWELL AND ITS FACTORY SYSTEM



BEFORE leaving Boston, I devoted one day to an excursion to Lowell.  
I assign a separate chapter to this visit; not because I am about 
to describe it at any great length, but because I remember it as a 
thing by itself, and am desirous that my readers should do the 
same.

I made acquaintance with an American railroad, on this occasion, 
for the first time.  As these works are pretty much alike all 
through the States, their general characteristics are easily 
described.

There are no first and second class carriages as with us; but there 
is a gentleman's car and a ladies' car:  the main distinction 
between which is that in the first, everybody smokes; and in the 
second, nobody does.  As a black man never travels with a white 
one, there is also a negro car; which is a great, blundering, 
clumsy chest, such as Gulliver put to sea in, from the kingdom of 
Brobdingnag.  There is a great deal of jolting, a great deal of 
noise, a great deal of wall, not much window, a locomotive engine, 
a shriek, and a bell.

The cars are like shabby omnibuses, but larger:  holding thirty, 
forty, fifty, people.  The seats, instead of stretching from end to 
end, are placed crosswise.  Each seat holds two persons.  There is 
a long row of them on each side of the caravan, a narrow passage up 
the middle, and a door at both ends.  In the centre of the carriage 
there is usually a stove, fed with charcoal or anthracite coal; 
which is for the most part red-hot.  It is insufferably close; and 
you see the hot air fluttering between yourself and any other 
object you may happen to look at, like the ghost of smoke.

In the ladies' car, there are a great many gentlemen who have 
ladies with them.  There are also a great many ladies who have 
nobody with them:  for any lady may travel alone, from one end of 
the United States to the other, and be certain of the most 
courteous and considerate treatment everywhere.  The conductor or 
check-taker, or guard, or whatever he may be, wears no uniform.  He 
walks up and down the car, and in and out of it, as his fancy 
dictates; leans against the door with his hands in his pockets and 
stares at you, if you chance to be a stranger; or enters into 
conversation with the passengers about him.  A great many 
newspapers are pulled out, and a few of them are read.  Everybody 
talks to you, or to anybody else who hits his fancy.  If you are an 
Englishman, he expects that that railroad is pretty much like an 
English railroad.  If you say 'No,' he says 'Yes?' 
(interrogatively), and asks in what respect they differ.  You 
enumerate the heads of difference, one by one, and he says 'Yes?' 
(still interrogatively) to each.  Then he guesses that you don't 
travel faster in England; and on your replying that you do, says 
'Yes?' again (still interrogatively), and it is quite evident, 
don't believe it.  After a long pause he remarks, partly to you, 
and partly to the knob on the top of his stick, that 'Yankees are 
reckoned to be considerable of a go-ahead people too;' upon which 
YOU say 'Yes,' and then HE says 'Yes' again (affirmatively this 
time); and upon your looking out of window, tells you that behind 
that hill, and some three miles from the next station, there is a 
clever town in a smart lo-ca-tion, where he expects you have 
concluded to stop.  Your answer in the negative naturally leads to 
more questions in reference to your intended route (always 
pronounced rout); and wherever you are going, you invariably learn 
that you can't get there without immense difficulty and danger, and 
that all the great sights are somewhere else.

If a lady take a fancy to any male passenger's seat, the gentleman 
who accompanies her gives him notice of the fact, and he 
immediately vacates it with great politeness.  Politics are much 
discussed, so are banks, so is cotton.  Quiet people avoid the 
question of the Presidency, for there will be a new election in 
three years and a half, and party feeling runs very high:  the 
great constitutional feature of this institution being, that 
directly the acrimony of the last election is over, the acrimony of 
the next one begins; which is an unspeakable comfort to all strong 
politicians and true lovers of their country:  that is to say, to 
ninety-nine men and boys out of every ninety-nine and a quarter.

Except when a branch road joins the main one, there is seldom more 
than one track of rails; so that the road is very narrow, and the 
view, where there is a deep cutting, by no means extensive.  When 
there is not, the character of the scenery is always the same.  
Mile after mile of stunted trees:  some hewn down by the axe, some 
blown down by the wind, some half fallen and resting on their 
neighbours, many mere logs half hidden in the swamp, others 
mouldered away to spongy chips.  The very soil of the earth is made 
up of minute fragments such as these; each pool of stagnant water 
has its crust of vegetable rottenness; on every side there are the 
boughs, and trunks, and stumps of trees, in every possible stage of 
decay, decomposition, and neglect.  Now you emerge for a few brief 
minutes on an open country, glittering with some bright lake or 
pool, broad as many an English river, but so small here that it 
scarcely has a name; now catch hasty glimpses of a distant town, 
with its clean white houses and their cool piazzas, its prim New 
England church and school-house; when whir-r-r-r! almost before you 
have seen them, comes the same dark screen:  the stunted trees, the 
stumps, the logs, the stagnant water - all so like the last that 
you seem to have been transported back again by magic.

The train calls at stations in the woods, where the wild 
impossibility of anybody having the smallest reason to get out, is 
only to be equalled by the apparently desperate hopelessness of 
there being anybody to get in.  It rushes across the turnpike road, 
where there is no gate, no policeman, no signal:  nothing but a 
rough wooden arch, on which is painted 'WHEN THE BELL RINGS, LOOK 
OUT FOR THE LOCOMOTIVE.'  On it whirls headlong, dives through the 
woods again, emerges in the light, clatters over frail arches, 
rumbles upon the heavy ground, shoots beneath a wooden bridge which 
intercepts the light for a second like a wink, suddenly awakens all 
the slumbering echoes in the main street of a large town, and 
dashes on haphazard, pell-mell, neck-or-nothing, down the middle of 
the road.  There - with mechanics working at their trades, and 
people leaning from their doors and windows, and boys flying kites 
and playing marbles, and men smoking, and women talking, and 
children crawling, and pigs burrowing, and unaccustomed horses 
plunging and rearing, close to the very rails - there - on, on, on 
- tears the mad dragon of an engine with its train of cars; 
scattering in all directions a shower of burning sparks from its 
wood fire; screeching, hissing, yelling, panting; until at last the 
thirsty monster stops beneath a covered way to drink, the people 
cluster round, and you have time to breathe again.

I was met at the station at Lowell by a gentleman intimately 
connected with the management of the factories there; and gladly 
putting myself under his guidance, drove off at once to that 
quarter of the town in which the works, the object of my visit, 
were situated.  Although only just of age - for if my recollection 
serve me, it has been a manufacturing town barely one-and-twenty 
years - Lowell is a large, populous, thriving place.  Those 
indications of its youth which first attract the eye, give it a 
quaintness and oddity of character which, to a visitor from the old 
country, is amusing enough.  It was a very dirty winter's day, and 
nothing in the whole town looked old to me, except the mud, which 
in some parts was almost knee-deep, and might have been deposited 
there, on the subsiding of the waters after the Deluge.  In one 
place, there was a new wooden church, which, having no steeple, and 
being yet unpainted, looked like an enormous packing-case without 
any direction upon it.  In another there was a large hotel, whose 
walls and colonnades were so crisp, and thin, and slight, that it 
had exactly the appearance of being built with cards.  I was 
careful not to draw my breath as we passed, and trembled when I saw 
a workman come out upon the roof, lest with one thoughtless stamp 
of his foot he should crush the structure beneath him, and bring it 
rattling down.  The very river that moves the machinery in the 
mills (for they are all worked by water power), seems to acquire a 
new character from the fresh buildings of bright red brick and 
painted wood among which it takes its course; and to be as light-
headed, thoughtless, and brisk a young river, in its murmurings and 
tumblings, as one would desire to see.  One would swear that every 
'Bakery,' 'Grocery,' and 'Bookbindery,' and other kind of store, 
took its shutters down for the first time, and started in business 
yesterday.  The golden pestles and mortars fixed as signs upon the 
sun-blind frames outside the Druggists',  appear to have been just 
turned out of the United States' Mint; and when I saw a baby of 
some week or ten days old in a woman's arms at a street corner, I 
found myself unconsciously wondering where it came from:  never 
supposing for an instant that it could have been born in such a 
young town as that.

There are several factories in Lowell, each of which belongs to 
what we should term a Company of Proprietors, but what they call in 
America a Corporation.  I went over several of these; such as a 
woollen factory, a carpet factory, and a cotton factory:  examined 
them in every part; and saw them in their ordinary working aspect, 
with no preparation of any kind, or departure from their ordinary 
everyday proceedings.  I may add that I am well acquainted with our 
manufacturing towns in England, and have visited many mills in 
Manchester and elsewhere in the same manner.

I happened to arrive at the first factory just as the dinner hour 
was over, and the girls were returning to their work; indeed the 
stairs of the mill were thronged with them as I ascended.  They 
were all well dressed, but not to my thinking above their 
condition; for I like to see the humbler classes of society careful 
of their dress and appearance, and even, if they please, decorated 
with such little trinkets as come within the compass of their 
means.  Supposing it confined within reasonable limits, I would 
always encourage this kind of pride, as a worthy element of self-
respect, in any person I employed; and should no more be deterred 
from doing so, because some wretched female referred her fall to a 
love of dress, than I would allow my construction of the real 
intent and meaning of the Sabbath to be influenced by any warning 
to the well-disposed, founded on his backslidings on that 
particular day, which might emanate from the rather doubtful 
authority of a murderer in Newgate.

These girls, as I have said, were all well dressed:  and that 
phrase necessarily includes extreme cleanliness.  They had 
serviceable bonnets, good warm cloaks, and shawls; and were not 
above clogs and pattens.  Moreover, there were places in the mill 
in which they could deposit these things without injury; and there 
were conveniences for washing.  They were healthy in appearance, 
many of them remarkably so, and had the manners and deportment of 
young women:  not of degraded brutes of burden.  If I had seen in 
one of those mills (but I did not, though I looked for something of 
this kind with a sharp eye), the most lisping, mincing, affected, 
and ridiculous young creature that my imagination could suggest, I 
should have thought of the careless, moping, slatternly, degraded, 
dull reverse (I HAVE seen that), and should have been still well 
pleased to look upon her.

The rooms in which they worked, were as well ordered as themselves.  
In the windows of some, there were green plants, which were trained 
to shade the glass; in all, there was as much fresh air, 
cleanliness, and comfort, as the nature of the occupation would 
possibly admit of.  Out of so large a number of females, many of 
whom were only then just verging upon womanhood, it may be 
reasonably supposed that some were delicate and fragile in 
appearance:  no doubt there were.  But I solemnly declare, that 
from all the crowd I saw in the different factories that day, I 
cannot recall or separate one young face that gave me a painful 
impression; not one young girl whom, assuming it to be a matter of 
necessity that she should gain her daily bread by the labour of her 
hands, I would have removed from those works if I had had the 
power.

They reside in various boarding-houses near at hand.  The owners of 
the mills are particularly careful to allow no persons to enter 
upon the possession of these houses, whose characters have not 
undergone the most searching and thorough inquiry.  Any complaint 
that is made against them, by the boarders, or by any one else, is 
fully investigated; and if good ground of complaint be shown to 
exist against them, they are removed, and their occupation is 
handed over to some more deserving person.  There are a few 
children employed in these factories, but not many.  The laws of 
the State forbid their working more than nine months in the year, 
and require that they be educated during the other three.  For this 
purpose there are schools in Lowell; and there are churches and 
chapels of various persuasions, in which the young women may 
observe that form of worship in which they have been educated.

At some distance from the factories, and on the highest and 
pleasantest ground in the neighbourhood, stands their hospital, or 
boarding-house for the sick:  it is the best house in those parts, 
and was built by an eminent merchant for his own residence.  Like 
that institution at Boston, which I have before described, it is 
not parcelled out into wards, but is divided into convenient 
chambers, each of which has all the comforts of a very comfortable 
home.  The principal medical attendant resides under the same roof; 
and were the patients members of his own family, they could not be 
better cared for, or attended with greater gentleness and 
consideration.  The weekly charge in this establishment for each 
female patient is three dollars, or twelve shillings English; but 
no girl employed by any of the corporations is ever excluded for 
want of the means of payment.  That they do not very often want the 
means, may be gathered from the fact, that in July, 1841, no fewer 
than nine hundred and seventy-eight of these girls were depositors 
in the Lowell Savings Bank:  the amount of whose joint savings was 
estimated at one hundred thousand dollars, or twenty thousand 
English pounds.

I am now going to state three facts, which will startle a large 
class of readers on this side of the Atlantic, very much.

Firstly, there is a joint-stock piano in a great many of the 
boarding-houses.  Secondly, nearly all these young ladies subscribe 
to circulating libraries.  Thirdly, they have got up among 
themselves a periodical called THE LOWELL OFFERING, 'A repository 
of original articles, written exclusively by females actively 
employed in the mills,' - which is duly printed, published, and 
sold; and whereof I brought away from Lowell four hundred good 
solid pages, which I have read from beginning to end.

The large class of readers, startled by these facts, will exclaim, 
with one voice, 'How very preposterous!'  On my deferentially 
inquiring why, they will answer, 'These things are above their 
station.'  In reply to that objection, I would beg to ask what 
their station is.

It is their station to work.  And they DO work.  They labour in 
these mills, upon an average, twelve hours a day, which is 
unquestionably work, and pretty tight work too.  Perhaps it is 
above their station to indulge in such amusements, on any terms.  
Are we quite sure that we in England have not formed our ideas of 
the 'station' of working people, from accustoming ourselves to the 
contemplation of that class as they are, and not as they might be?  
I think that if we examine our own feelings, we shall find that the 
pianos, and the circulating libraries, and even the Lowell 
Offering, startle us by their novelty, and not by their bearing 
upon any abstract question of right or wrong.

For myself, I know no station in which, the occupation of to-day 
cheerfully done and the occupation of to-morrow cheerfully looked 
to, any one of these pursuits is not most humanising and laudable.  
I know no station which is rendered more endurable to the person in 
it, or more safe to the person out of it, by having ignorance for 
its associate.  I know no station which has a right to monopolise 
the means of mutual instruction, improvement, and rational 
entertainment; or which has ever continued to be a station very 
long, after seeking to do so.

Of the merits of the Lowell Offering as a literary production, I 
will only observe, putting entirely out of sight the fact of the 
articles having been written by these girls after the arduous 
labours of the day, that it will compare advantageously with a 
great many English Annuals.  It is pleasant to find that many of 
its Tales are of the Mills and of those who work in them; that they 
inculcate habits of self-denial and contentment, and teach good 
doctrines of enlarged benevolence.  A strong feeling for the 
beauties of nature, as displayed in the solitudes the writers have 
left at home, breathes through its pages like wholesome village 
air; and though a circulating library is a favourable school for 
the study of such topics, it has very scant allusion to fine 
clothes, fine marriages, fine houses, or fine life.  Some persons 
might object to the papers being signed occasionally with rather 
fine names, but this is an American fashion.  One of the provinces 
of the state legislature of Massachusetts is to alter ugly names 
into pretty ones, as the children improve upon the tastes of their 
parents.  These changes costing little or nothing, scores of Mary 
Annes are solemnly converted into Bevelinas every session.

It is said that on the occasion of a visit from General Jackson or 
General Harrison to this town (I forget which, but it is not to the 
purpose), he walked through three miles and a half of these young 
ladies all dressed out with parasols and silk stockings.  But as I 
am not aware that any worse consequence ensued, than a sudden 
looking-up of all the parasols and silk stockings in the market; 
and perhaps the bankruptcy of some speculative New Englander who 
bought them all up at any price, in expectation of a demand that 
never came; I set no great store by the circumstance.

In this brief account of Lowell, and inadequate expression of the 
gratification it yielded me, and cannot fail to afford to any 
foreigner to whom the condition of such people at home is a subject 
of interest and anxious speculation, I have carefully abstained 
from drawing a comparison between these factories and those of our 
own land.  Many of the circumstances whose strong influence has 
been at work for years in our manufacturing towns have not arisen 
here; and there is no manufacturing population in Lowell, so to 
speak:  for these girls (often the daughters of small farmers) come 
from other States, remain a few years in the mills, and then go 
home for good.

The contrast would be a strong one, for it would be between the 
Good and Evil, the living light and deepest shadow.  I abstain from 
it, because I deem it just to do so.  But I only the more earnestly 
adjure all those whose eyes may rest on these pages, to pause and 
reflect upon the difference between this town and those great 
haunts of desperate misery:  to call to mind, if they can in the 
midst of party strife and squabble, the efforts that must be made 
to purge them of their suffering and danger:  and last, and 
foremost, to remember how the precious Time is rushing by.

I returned at night by the same railroad and in the same kind of 
car.  One of the passengers being exceedingly anxious to expound at 
great length to my companion (not to me, of course) the true 
principles on which books of travel in America should be written by 
Englishmen, I feigned to fall asleep.  But glancing all the way out 
at window from the corners of my eyes, I found abundance of 
entertainment for the rest of the ride in watching the effects of 
the wood fire, which had been invisible in the morning but were now 
brought out in full relief by the darkness:  for we were travelling 
in a whirlwind of bright sparks, which showered about us like a 
storm of fiery snow.



CHAPTER V - WORCESTER.  THE CONNECTICUT RIVER.  HARTFORD.  NEW 
HAVEN.  TO NEW YORK



LEAVING Boston on the afternoon of Saturday the fifth of February, 
we proceeded by another railroad to Worcester:  a pretty New 
England town, where we had arranged to remain under the hospitable 
roof of the Governor of the State, until Monday morning.

These towns and cities of New England (many of which would be 
villages in Old England), are as favourable specimens of rural 
America, as their people are of rural Americans.  The well-trimmed 
lawns and green meadows of home are not there; and the grass, 
compared with our ornamental plots and pastures, is rank, and 
rough, and wild:  but delicate slopes of land, gently-swelling 
hills, wooded valleys, and slender streams, abound.  Every little 
colony of houses has its church and school-house peeping from among 
the white roofs and shady trees; every house is the whitest of the 
white; every Venetian blind the greenest of the green; every fine 
day's sky the bluest of the blue.  A sharp dry wind and a slight 
frost had so hardened the roads when we alighted at Worcester, that 
their furrowed tracks were like ridges of granite.  There was the 
usual aspect of newness on every object, of course.  All the 
buildings looked as if they had been built and painted that 
morning, and could be taken down on Monday with very little 
trouble.  In the keen evening air, every sharp outline looked a 
hundred times sharper than ever.  The clean cardboard colonnades 
had no more perspective than a Chinese bridge on a tea-cup, and 
appeared equally well calculated for use.  The razor-like edges of 
the detached cottages seemed to cut the very wind as it whistled 
against them, and to send it smarting on its way with a shriller 
cry than before.  Those slightly-built wooden dwellings behind 
which the sun was setting with a brilliant lustre, could be so 
looked through and through, that the idea of any inhabitant being 
able to hide himself from the public gaze, or to have any secrets 
from the public eye, was not entertainable for a moment.  Even 
where a blazing fire shone through the uncurtained windows of some 
distant house, it had the air of being newly lighted, and of 
lacking warmth; and instead of awakening thoughts of a snug 
chamber, bright with faces that first saw the light round that same 
hearth, and ruddy with warm hangings, it came upon one suggestive 
of the smell of new mortar and damp walls.

So I thought, at least, that evening.  Next morning when the sun 
was shining brightly, and the clear church bells were ringing, and 
sedate people in their best clothes enlivened the pathway near at 
hand and dotted the distant thread of road, there was a pleasant 
Sabbath peacefulness on everything, which it was good to feel.  It 
would have been the better for an old church; better still for some 
old graves; but as it was, a wholesome repose and tranquillity 
pervaded the scene, which after the restless ocean and the hurried 
city, had a doubly grateful influence on the spirits.

We went on next morning, still by railroad, to Springfield.  From 
that place to Hartford, whither we were bound, is a distance of 
only five-and-twenty miles, but at that time of the year the roads 
were so bad that the journey would probably have occupied ten or 
twelve hours.  Fortunately, however, the winter having been 
unusually mild, the Connecticut River was 'open,' or, in other 
words, not frozen.  The captain of a small steamboat was going to 
make his first trip for the season that day (the second February 
trip, I believe, within the memory of man), and only waited for us 
to go on board.  Accordingly, we went on board, with as little 
delay as might be.  He was as good as his word, and started 
directly.

It certainly was not called a small steamboat without reason.  I 
omitted to ask the question, but I should think it must have been 
of about half a pony power.  Mr. Paap, the celebrated Dwarf, might 
have lived and died happily in the cabin, which was fitted with 
common sash-windows like an ordinary dwelling-house.  These windows 
had bright-red curtains, too, hung on slack strings across the 
lower panes; so that it looked like the parlour of a Lilliputian 
public-house, which had got afloat in a flood or some other water 
accident, and was drifting nobody knew where.  But even in this 
chamber there was a rocking-chair.  It would be impossible to get 
on anywhere, in America, without a rocking-chair.  I am afraid to 
tell how many feet short this vessel was, or how many feet narrow:  
to apply the words length and width to such measurement would be a 
contradiction in terms.  But I may state that we all kept the 
middle of the deck, lest the boat should unexpectedly tip over; and 
that the machinery, by some surprising process of condensation, 
worked between it and the keel:  the whole forming a warm sandwich, 
about three feet thick.

It rained all day as I once thought it never did rain anywhere, but 
in the Highlands of Scotland.  The river was full of floating 
blocks of ice, which were constantly crunching and cracking under 
us; and the depth of water, in the course we took to avoid the 
larger masses, carried down the middle of the river by the current, 
did not exceed a few inches.  Nevertheless, we moved onward, 
dexterously; and being well wrapped up, bade defiance to the 
weather, and enjoyed the journey.  The Connecticut River is a fine 
stream; and the banks in summer-time are, I have no doubt, 
beautiful; at all events, I was told so by a young lady in the 
cabin; and she should be a judge of beauty, if the possession of a 
quality include the appreciation of it, for a more beautiful 
creature I never looked upon.

After two hours and a half of this odd travelling (including a 
stoppage at a small town, where we were saluted by a gun 
considerably bigger than our own chimney), we reached Hartford, and 
straightway repaired to an extremely comfortable hotel:  except, as 
usual, in the article of bedrooms, which, in almost every place we 
visited, were very conducive to early rising.

We tarried here, four days.  The town is beautifully situated in a 
basin of green hills; the soil is rich, well-wooded, and carefully 
improved.  It is the seat of the local legislature of Connecticut, 
which sage body enacted, in bygone times, the renowned code of 
'Blue Laws,' in virtue whereof, among other enlightened provisions, 
any citizen who could be proved to have kissed his wife on Sunday, 
was punishable, I believe, with the stocks.  Too much of the old 
Puritan spirit exists in these parts to the present hour; but its 
influence has not tended, that I know, to make the people less hard 
in their bargains, or more equal in their dealings.  As I never 
heard of its working that effect anywhere else, I infer that it 
never will, here.  Indeed, I am accustomed, with reference to great 
professions and severe faces, to judge of the goods of the other 
world pretty much as I judge of the goods of this; and whenever I 
see a dealer in such commodities with too great a display of them 
in his window, I doubt the quality of the article within.

In Hartford stands the famous oak in which the charter of King 
Charles was hidden.  It is now inclosed in a gentleman's garden.  
In the State House is the charter itself.  I found the courts of 
law here, just the same as at Boston; the public institutions 
almost as good.  The Insane Asylum is admirably conducted, and so 
is the Institution for the Deaf and Dumb.

I very much questioned within myself, as I walked through the 
Insane Asylum, whether I should have known the attendants from the 
patients, but for the few words which passed between the former, 
and the Doctor, in reference to the persons under their charge.  Of 
course I limit this remark merely to their looks; for the 
conversation of the mad people was mad enough.

There was one little, prim old lady, of very smiling and good-
humoured appearance, who came sidling up to me from the end of a 
long passage, and with a curtsey of inexpressible condescension, 
propounded this unaccountable inquiry:

'Does Pontefract still flourish, sir, upon the soil of England?'

'He does, ma'am,' I rejoined.

'When you last saw him, sir, he was - '

'Well, ma'am,' said I, 'extremely well.  He begged me to present 
his compliments.  I never saw him looking better.'

At this, the old lady was very much delighted.  After glancing at 
me for a moment, as if to be quite sure that I was serious in my 
respectful air, she sidled back some paces; sidled forward again; 
made a sudden skip (at which I precipitately retreated a step or 
two); and said:

'I am an antediluvian, sir.'

I thought the best thing to say was, that I had suspected as much 
from the first.  Therefore I said so.

'It is an extremely proud and pleasant thing, sir, to be an 
antediluvian,' said the old lady.

'I should think it was, ma'am,' I rejoined.

The old lady kissed her hand, gave another skip, smirked and sidled 
down the gallery in a most extraordinary manner, and ambled 
gracefully into her own bed-chamber.

In another part of the building, there was a male patient in bed; 
very much flushed and heated.

'Well,' said he, starting up, and pulling off his night-cap:  'It's 
all settled at last.  I have arranged it with Queen Victoria.'

'Arranged what?' asked the Doctor.

'Why, that business,' passing his hand wearily across his forehead, 
'about the siege of New York.'

'Oh!' said I, like a man suddenly enlightened.  For he looked at me 
for an answer.

'Yes.  Every house without a signal will be fired upon by the 
British troops.  No harm will be done to the others.  No harm at 
all.  Those that want to be safe, must hoist flags.  That's all 
they'll have to do.  They must hoist flags.'

Even while he was speaking he seemed, I thought, to have some faint 
idea that his talk was incoherent.  Directly he had said these 
words, he lay down again; gave a kind of a groan; and covered his 
hot head with the blankets.

There was another:  a young man, whose madness was love and music.  
After playing on the accordion a march he had composed, he was very 
anxious that I should walk into his chamber, which I immediately 
did.

By way of being very knowing, and humouring him to the top of his 
bent, I went to the window, which commanded a beautiful prospect, 
and remarked, with an address upon which I greatly plumed myself:

'What a delicious country you have about these lodgings of yours!'

'Poh!' said he, moving his fingers carelessly over the notes of his 
instrument:  'WELL ENOUGH FOR SUCH AN INSTITUTION AS THIS!'

I don't think I was ever so taken aback in all my life.

'I come here just for a whim,' he said coolly.  'That's all.'

'Oh!  That's all!' said I.

'Yes.  That's all.  The Doctor's a smart man.  He quite enters into 
it.  It's a joke of mine.  I like it for a time.  You needn't 
mention it, but I think I shall go out next Tuesday!'

I assured him that I would consider our interview perfectly 
confidential; and rejoined the Doctor.  As we were passing through 
a gallery on our way out, a well-dressed lady, of quiet and 
composed manners, came up, and proffering a slip of paper and a 
pen, begged that I would oblige her with an autograph, I complied, 
and we parted.

'I think I remember having had a few interviews like that, with 
ladies out of doors.  I hope SHE is not mad?'

'Yes.'

'On what subject?  Autographs?'

'No.  She hears voices in the air.'

'Well!' thought I, 'it would be well if we could shut up a few 
false prophets of these later times, who have professed to do the 
same; and I should like to try the experiment on a Mormonist or two 
to begin with.'

In this place, there is the best jail for untried offenders in the 
world.  There is also a very well-ordered State prison, arranged 
upon the same plan as that at Boston, except that here, there is 
always a sentry on the wall with a loaded gun.  It contained at 
that time about two hundred prisoners.  A spot was shown me in the 
sleeping ward, where a watchman was murdered some years since in 
the dead of night, in a desperate attempt to escape, made by a 
prisoner who had broken from his cell.  A woman, too, was pointed 
out to me, who, for the murder of her husband, had been a close 
prisoner for sixteen years.

'Do you think,' I asked of my conductor, 'that after so very long 
an imprisonment, she has any thought or hope of ever regaining her 
liberty?'

'Oh dear yes,' he answered.  'To be sure she has.'

'She has no chance of obtaining it, I suppose?'

'Well, I don't know:' which, by-the-bye, is a national answer.  
'Her friends mistrust her.'

'What have THEY to do with it?' I naturally inquired.

'Well, they won't petition.'

'But if they did, they couldn't get her out, I suppose?'

'Well, not the first time, perhaps, nor yet the second, but tiring 
and wearying for a few years might do it.'

'Does that ever do it?'

'Why yes, that'll do it sometimes.  Political friends'll do it 
sometimes.  It's pretty often done, one way or another.'

I shall always entertain a very pleasant and grateful recollection 
of Hartford.  It is a lovely place, and I had many friends there, 
whom I can never remember with indifference.  We left it with no 
little regret on the evening of Friday the 11th, and travelled that 
night by railroad to New Haven.  Upon the way, the guard and I were 
formally introduced to each other (as we usually were on such 
occasions), and exchanged a variety of small-talk.  We reached New 
Haven at about eight o'clock, after a journey of three hours, and 
put up for the night at the best inn.

New Haven, known also as the City of Elms, is a fine town.  Many of 
its streets (as its ALIAS sufficiently imports) are planted with 
rows of grand old elm-trees; and the same natural ornaments 
surround Yale College, an establishment of considerable eminence 
and reputation.  The various departments of this Institution are 
erected in a kind of park or common in the middle of the town, 
where they are dimly visible among the shadowing trees.  The effect 
is very like that of an old cathedral yard in England; and when 
their branches are in full leaf, must be extremely picturesque.  
Even in the winter time, these groups of well-grown trees, 
clustering among the busy streets and houses of a thriving city, 
have a very quaint appearance:  seeming to bring about a kind of 
compromise between town and country; as if each had met the other 
half-way, and shaken hands upon it; which is at once novel and 
pleasant.

After a night's rest, we rose early, and in good time went down to 
the wharf, and on board the packet New York FOR New York.  This was 
the first American steamboat of any size that I had seen; and 
certainly to an English eye it was infinitely less like a steamboat 
than a huge floating bath.  I could hardly persuade myself, indeed, 
but that the bathing establishment off Westminster Bridge, which I 
left a baby, had suddenly grown to an enormous size; run away from 
home; and set up in foreign parts as a steamer.  Being in America, 
too, which our vagabonds do so particularly favour, it seemed the 
more probable.

The great difference in appearance between these packets and ours, 
is, that there is so much of them out of the water:  the main-deck 
being enclosed on all sides, and filled with casks and goods, like 
any second or third floor in a stack of warehouses; and the 
promenade or hurricane-deck being a-top of that again.  A part of 
the machinery is always above this deck; where the connecting-rod, 
in a strong and lofty frame, is seen working away like an iron top-
sawyer.  There is seldom any mast or tackle:  nothing aloft but two 
tall black chimneys.  The man at the helm is shut up in a little 
house in the fore part of the boat (the wheel being connected with 
the rudder by iron chains, working the whole length of the deck); 
and the passengers, unless the weather be very fine indeed, usually 
congregate below.  Directly you have left the wharf, all the life, 
and stir, and bustle of a packet cease.  You wonder for a long time 
how she goes on, for there seems to be nobody in charge of her; and 
when another of these dull machines comes splashing by, you feel 
quite indignant with it, as a sullen cumbrous, ungraceful, 
unshiplike leviathan:  quite forgetting that the vessel you are on 
board of, is its very counterpart.

There is always a clerk's office on the lower deck, where you pay 
your fare; a ladies' cabin; baggage and stowage rooms; engineer's 
room; and in short a great variety of perplexities which render the 
discovery of the gentlemen's cabin, a matter of some difficulty.  
It often occupies the whole length of the boat (as it did in this 
case), and has three or four tiers of berths on each side.  When I 
first descended into the cabin of the New York, it looked, in my 
unaccustomed eyes, about as long as the Burlington Arcade.

The Sound which has to be crossed on this passage, is not always a 
very safe or pleasant navigation, and has been the scene of some 
unfortunate accidents.  It was a wet morning, and very misty, and 
we soon lost sight of land.  The day was calm, however, and 
brightened towards noon.  After exhausting (with good help from a 
friend) the larder, and the stock of bottled beer, I lay down to 
sleep; being very much tired with the fatigues of yesterday.  But I 
woke from my nap in time to hurry up, and see Hell Gate, the Hog's 
Back, the Frying Pan, and other notorious localities, attractive to 
all readers of famous Diedrich Knickerbocker's History.  We were 
now in a narrow channel, with sloping banks on either side, 
besprinkled with pleasant villas, and made refreshing to the sight 
by turf and trees.  Soon we shot in quick succession, past a light-
house; a madhouse (how the lunatics flung up their caps and roared 
in sympathy with the headlong engine and the driving tide!); a 
jail; and other buildings:  and so emerged into a noble bay, whose 
waters sparkled in the now cloudless sunshine like Nature's eyes 
turned up to Heaven.

Then there lay stretched out before us, to the right, confused 
heaps of buildings, with here and there a spire or steeple, looking 
down upon the herd below; and here and there, again, a cloud of 
lazy smoke; and in the foreground a forest of ships' masts, cheery 
with flapping sails and waving flags.  Crossing from among them to 
the opposite shore, were steam ferry-boats laden with people, 
coaches, horses, waggons, baskets, boxes:  crossed and recrossed by 
other ferry-boats:  all travelling to and fro:  and never idle.  
Stately among these restless Insects, were two or three large 
ships, moving with slow majestic pace, as creatures of a prouder 
kind, disdainful of their puny journeys, and making for the broad 
sea.  Beyond, were shining heights, and islands in the glancing 
river, and a distance scarcely less blue and bright than the sky it 
seemed to meet.  The city's hum and buzz, the clinking of capstans, 
the ringing of bells, the barking of dogs, the clattering of 
wheels, tingled in the listening ear.  All of which life and stir, 
coming across the stirring water, caught new life and animation 
from its free companionship; and, sympathising with its buoyant 
spirits, glistened as it seemed in sport upon its surface, and 
hemmed the vessel round, and plashed the water high about her 
sides, and, floating her gallantly into the dock, flew off again to 
welcome other comers, and speed before them to the busy port.




CHAPTER VI - NEW YORK



THE beautiful metropolis of America is by no means so clean a city 
as Boston, but many of its streets have the same characteristics; 
except that the houses are not quite so fresh-coloured, the sign-
boards are not quite so gaudy, the gilded letters not quite so 
golden, the bricks not quite so red, the stone not quite so white, 
the blinds and area railings not quite so green, the knobs and 
plates upon the street doors not quite so bright and twinkling.  
There are many by-streets, almost as neutral in clean colours, and 
positive in dirty ones, as by-streets in London; and there is one 
quarter, commonly called the Five Points, which, in respect of 
filth and wretchedness, may be safely backed against Seven Dials, 
or any other part of famed St. Giles's.

The great promenade and thoroughfare, as most people know, is 
Broadway; a wide and bustling street, which, from the Battery 
Gardens to its opposite termination in a country road, may be four 
miles long.  Shall we sit down in an upper floor of the Carlton 
House Hotel (situated in the best part of this main artery of New 
York), and when we are tired of looking down upon the life below, 
sally forth arm-in-arm, and mingle with the stream?

Warm weather!  The sun strikes upon our heads at this open window, 
as though its rays were concentrated through a burning-glass; but 
the day is in its zenith, and the season an unusual one.  Was there 
ever such a sunny street as this Broadway!  The pavement stones are 
polished with the tread of feet until they shine again; the red 
bricks of the houses might be yet in the dry, hot kilns; and the 
roofs of those omnibuses look as though, if water were poured on 
them, they would hiss and smoke, and smell like half-quenched 
fires.  No stint of omnibuses here!  Half-a-dozen have gone by 
within as many minutes.  Plenty of hackney cabs and coaches too; 
gigs, phaetons, large-wheeled tilburies, and private carriages - 
rather of a clumsy make, and not very different from the public 
vehicles, but built for the heavy roads beyond the city pavement.  
Negro coachmen and white; in straw hats, black hats, white hats, 
glazed caps, fur caps; in coats of drab, black, brown, green, blue, 
nankeen, striped jean and linen; and there, in that one instance 
(look while it passes, or it will be too late), in suits of livery.  
Some southern republican that, who puts his blacks in uniform, and 
swells with Sultan pomp and power.  Yonder, where that phaeton with 
the well-clipped pair of grays has stopped - standing at their 
heads now - is a Yorkshire groom, who has not been very long in 
these parts, and looks sorrowfully round for a companion pair of 
top-boots, which he may traverse the city half a year without 
meeting.  Heaven save the ladies, how they dress!  We have seen 
more colours in these ten minutes, than we should have seen 
elsewhere, in as many days.  What various parasols! what rainbow 
silks and satins! what pinking of thin stockings, and pinching of 
thin shoes, and fluttering of ribbons and silk tassels, and display 
of rich cloaks with gaudy hoods and linings!  The young gentlemen 
are fond, you see, of turning down their shirt-collars and 
cultivating their whiskers, especially under the chin; but they 
cannot approach the ladies in their dress or bearing, being, to say 
the truth, humanity of quite another sort.  Byrons of the desk and 
counter, pass on, and let us see what kind of men those are behind 
ye:  those two labourers in holiday clothes, of whom one carries in 
his hand a crumpled scrap of paper from which he tries to spell out 
a hard name, while the other looks about for it on all the doors 
and windows.

Irishmen both!  You might know them, if they were masked, by their 
long-tailed blue coats and bright buttons, and their drab trousers, 
which they wear like men well used to working dresses, who are easy 
in no others.  It would be hard to keep your model republics going, 
without the countrymen and countrywomen of those two labourers.  
For who else would dig, and delve, and drudge, and do domestic 
work, and make canals and roads, and execute great lines of 
Internal Improvement!  Irishmen both, and sorely puzzled too, to 
find out what they seek.  Let us go down, and help them, for the 
love of home, and that spirit of liberty which admits of honest 
service to honest men, and honest work for honest bread, no matter 
what it be.

That's well!  We have got at the right address at last, though it 
is written in strange characters truly, and might have been 
scrawled with the blunt handle of the spade the writer better knows 
the use of, than a pen.  Their way lies yonder, but what business 
takes them there?  They carry savings:  to hoard up?  No.  They are 
brothers, those men.  One crossed the sea alone, and working very 
hard for one half year, and living harder, saved funds enough to 
bring the other out.  That done, they worked together side by side, 
contentedly sharing hard labour and hard living for another term, 
and then their sisters came, and then another brother, and lastly, 
their old mother.  And what now?  Why, the poor old crone is 
restless in a strange land, and yearns to lay her bones, she says, 
among her people in the old graveyard at home:  and so they go to 
pay her passage back:  and God help her and them, and every simple 
heart, and all who turn to the Jerusalem of their younger days, and 
have an altar-fire upon the cold hearth of their fathers.

This narrow thoroughfare, baking and blistering in the sun, is Wall 
Street:  the Stock Exchange and Lombard Street of New York.  Many a 
rapid fortune has been made in this street, and many a no less 
rapid ruin.  Some of these very merchants whom you see hanging 
about here now, have locked up money in their strong-boxes, like 
the man in the Arabian Nights, and opening them again, have found 
but withered leaves.  Below, here by the water-side, where the 
bowsprits of ships stretch across the footway, and almost thrust 
themselves into the windows, lie the noble American vessels which 
having made their Packet Service the finest in the world.  They 
have brought hither the foreigners who abound in all the streets:  
not, perhaps, that there are more here, than in other commercial 
cities; but elsewhere, they have particular haunts, and you must 
find them out; here, they pervade the town.

We must cross Broadway again; gaining some refreshment from the 
heat, in the sight of the great blocks of clean ice which are being 
carried into shops and bar-rooms; and the pine-apples and water-
melons profusely displayed for sale.  Fine streets of spacious 
houses here, you see! - Wall Street has furnished and dismantled 
many of them very often - and here a deep green leafy square.  Be 
sure that is a hospitable house with inmates to be affectionately 
remembered always, where they have the open door and pretty show of 
plants within, and where the child with laughing eyes is peeping 
out of window at the little dog below.  You wonder what may be the 
use of this tall flagstaff in the by-street, with something like 
Liberty's head-dress on its top:  so do I.  But there is a passion 
for tall flagstaffs hereabout, and you may see its twin brother in 
five minutes, if you have a mind.

Again across Broadway, and so - passing from the many-coloured 
crowd and glittering shops - into another long main street, the 
Bowery.  A railroad yonder, see, where two stout horses trot along, 
drawing a score or two of people and a great wooden ark, with ease.  
The stores are poorer here; the passengers less gay.  Clothes 
ready-made, and meat ready-cooked, are to be bought in these parts; 
and the lively whirl of carriages is exchanged for the deep rumble 
of carts and waggons.  These signs which are so plentiful, in shape 
like river buoys, or small balloons, hoisted by cords to poles, and 
dangling there, announce, as you may see by looking up, 'OYSTERS IN 
EVERY STYLE.'  They tempt the hungry most at night, for then dull 
candles glimmering inside, illuminate these dainty words, and make 
the mouths of idlers water, as they read and linger.

What is this dismal-fronted pile of bastard Egyptian, like an 
enchanter's palace in a melodrama! - a famous prison, called The 
Tombs.  Shall we go in?

So.  A long, narrow, lofty building, stove-heated as usual, with 
four galleries, one above the other, going round it, and 
communicating by stairs.  Between the two sides of each gallery, 
and in its centre, a bridge, for the greater convenience of 
crossing.  On each of these bridges sits a man:  dozing or reading, 
or talking to an idle companion.  On each tier, are two opposite 
rows of small iron doors.  They look like furnace-doors, but are 
cold and black, as though the fires within had all gone out.  Some 
two or three are open, and women, with drooping heads bent down, 
are talking to the inmates.  The whole is lighted by a skylight, 
but it is fast closed; and from the roof there dangle, limp and 
drooping, two useless windsails.

A man with keys appears, to show us round.  A good-looking fellow, 
and, in his way, civil and obliging.

'Are those black doors the cells?'

'Yes.'

'Are they all full?'

'Well, they're pretty nigh full, and that's a fact, and no two ways 
about it.'

'Those at the bottom are unwholesome, surely?'

'Why, we DO only put coloured people in 'em.  That's the truth.'

'When do the prisoners take exercise?'

'Well, they do without it pretty much.'

'Do they never walk in the yard?'

'Considerable seldom.'

'Sometimes, I suppose?'

'Well, it's rare they do.  They keep pretty bright without it.'

'But suppose a man were here for a twelvemonth.  I know this is 
only a prison for criminals who are charged with grave offences, 
while they are awaiting their trial, or under remand, but the law 
here affords criminals many means of delay.  What with motions for 
new trials, and in arrest of judgment, and what not, a prisoner 
might be here for twelve months, I take it, might he not?'

'Well, I guess he might.'

'Do you mean to say that in all that time he would never come out 
at that little iron door, for exercise?'

'He might walk some, perhaps - not much.'

'Will you open one of the doors?'

'All, if you like.'

The fastenings jar and rattle, and one of the doors turns slowly on 
its hinges.  Let us look in.  A small bare cell, into which the 
light enters through a high chink in the wall.  There is a rude 
means of washing, a table, and a bedstead.  Upon the latter, sits a 
man of sixty; reading.  He looks up for a moment; gives an 
impatient dogged shake; and fixes his eyes upon his book again.  As 
we withdraw our heads, the door closes on him, and is fastened as 
before.  This man has murdered his wife, and will probably be 
hanged.

'How long has he been here?'

'A month.'

'When will he be tried?'

'Next term.'

'When is that?'

'Next month.'

'In England, if a man be under sentence of death, even he has air 
and exercise at certain periods of the day.'

'Possible?'

With what stupendous and untranslatable coolness he says this, and 
how loungingly he leads on to the women's side:  making, as he 
goes, a kind of iron castanet of the key and the stair-rail!

Each cell door on this side has a square aperture in it.  Some of 
the women peep anxiously through it at the sound of footsteps; 
others shrink away in shame. - For what offence can that lonely 
child, of ten or twelve years old, be shut up here?  Oh! that boy?  
He is the son of the prisoner we saw just now; is a witness against 
his father; and is detained here for safe keeping, until the trial; 
that's all.

But it is a dreadful place for the child to pass the long days and 
nights in.  This is rather hard treatment for a young witness, is 
it not? - What says our conductor?

'Well, it an't a very rowdy life, and THAT'S a fact!'

Again he clinks his metal castanet, and leads us leisurely away.  I 
have a question to ask him as we go.

'Pray, why do they call this place The Tombs?'

'Well, it's the cant name.'

'I know it is.  Why?'

'Some suicides happened here, when it was first built.  I expect it 
come about from that.'

'I saw just now, that that man's clothes were scattered about the 
floor of his cell.  Don't you oblige the prisoners to be orderly, 
and put such things away?'

'Where should they put 'em?'

'Not on the ground surely.  What do you say to hanging them up?'

He stops and looks round to emphasise his answer:

'Why, I say that's just it.  When they had hooks they WOULD hang 
themselves, so they're taken out of every cell, and there's only 
the marks left where they used to be!'

The prison-yard in which he pauses now, has been the scene of 
terrible performances.  Into this narrow, grave-like place, men are 
brought out to die.  The wretched creature stands beneath the 
gibbet on the ground; the rope about his neck; and when the sign is 
given, a weight at its other end comes running down, and swings him 
up into the air - a corpse.

The law requires that there be present at this dismal spectacle, 
the judge, the jury, and citizens to the amount of twenty-five.  
From the community it is hidden.  To the dissolute and bad, the 
thing remains a frightful mystery.  Between the criminal and them, 
the prison-wall is interposed as a thick gloomy veil.  It is the 
curtain to his bed of death, his winding-sheet, and grave.  From 
him it shuts out life, and all the motives to unrepenting hardihood 
in that last hour, which its mere sight and presence is often all-
sufficient to sustain.  There are no bold eyes to make him bold; no 
ruffians to uphold a ruffian's name before.  All beyond the 
pitiless stone wall, is unknown space.

Let us go forth again into the cheerful streets.

Once more in Broadway!  Here are the same ladies in bright colours, 
walking to and fro, in pairs and singly; yonder the very same light 
blue parasol which passed and repassed the hotel-window twenty 
times while we were sitting there.  We are going to cross here.  
Take care of the pigs.  Two portly sows are trotting up behind this 
carriage, and a select party of half-a-dozen gentlemen hogs have 
just now turned the corner.

Here is a solitary swine lounging homeward by himself.  He has only 
one ear; having parted with the other to vagrant-dogs in the course 
of his city rambles.  But he gets on very well without it; and 
leads a roving, gentlemanly, vagabond kind of life, somewhat 
answering to that of our club-men at home.  He leaves his lodgings 
every morning at a certain hour, throws himself upon the town, gets 
through his day in some manner quite satisfactory to himself, and 
regularly appears at the door of his own house again at night, like 
the mysterious master of Gil Blas.  He is a free-and-easy, 
careless, indifferent kind of pig, having a very large acquaintance 
among other pigs of the same character, whom he rather knows by 
sight than conversation, as he seldom troubles himself to stop and 
exchange civilities, but goes grunting down the kennel, turning up 
the news and small-talk of the city in the shape of cabbage-stalks 
and offal, and bearing no tails but his own:  which is a very short 
one, for his old enemies, the dogs, have been at that too, and have 
left him hardly enough to swear by.  He is in every respect a 
republican pig, going wherever he pleases, and mingling with the 
best society, on an equal, if not superior footing, for every one 
makes way when he appears, and the haughtiest give him the wall, if 
he prefer it.  He is a great philosopher, and seldom moved, unless 
by the dogs before mentioned.  Sometimes, indeed, you may see his 
small eye twinkling on a slaughtered friend, whose carcase 
garnishes a butcher's door-post, but he grunts out 'Such is life:  
all flesh is pork!' buries his nose in the mire again, and waddles 
down the gutter:  comforting himself with the reflection that there 
is one snout the less to anticipate stray cabbage-stalks, at any 
rate.

They are the city scavengers, these pigs.  Ugly brutes they are; 
having, for the most part, scanty brown backs, like the lids of old 
horsehair trunks:  spotted with unwholesome black blotches.  They 
have long, gaunt legs, too, and such peaked snouts, that if one of 
them could be persuaded to sit for his profile, nobody would 
recognise it for a pig's likeness.  They are never attended upon, 
or fed, or driven, or caught, but are thrown upon their own 
resources in early life, and become preternaturally knowing in 
consequence.  Every pig knows where he lives, much better than 
anybody could tell him.  At this hour, just as evening is closing 
in, you will see them roaming towards bed by scores, eating their 
way to the last.  Occasionally, some youth among them who has over-
eaten himself, or has been worried by dogs, trots shrinkingly 
homeward, like a prodigal son:  but this is a rare case:  perfect 
self-possession and self-reliance, and immovable composure, being 
their foremost attributes.

The streets and shops are lighted now; and as the eye travels down 
the long thoroughfare, dotted with bright jets of gas, it is 
reminded of Oxford Street, or Piccadilly.  Here and there a flight 
of broad stone cellar-steps appears, and a painted lamp directs you 
to the Bowling Saloon, or Ten-Pin alley; Ten-Pins being a game of 
mingled chance and skill, invented when the legislature passed an 
act forbidding Nine-Pins.  At other downward flights of steps, are 
other lamps, marking the whereabouts of oyster-cellars - pleasant 
retreats, say I:  not only by reason of their wonderful cookery of 
oysters, pretty nigh as large as cheese-plates (or for thy dear 
sake, heartiest of Greek Professors!), but because of all kinds of 
caters of fish, or flesh, or fowl, in these latitudes, the 
swallowers of oysters alone are not gregarious; but subduing 
themselves, as it were, to the nature of what they work in, and 
copying the coyness of the thing they eat, do sit apart in 
curtained boxes, and consort by twos, not by two hundreds.

But how quiet the streets are!  Are there no itinerant bands; no 
wind or stringed instruments?  No, not one.  By day, are there no 
Punches, Fantoccini, Dancing-dogs, Jugglers, Conjurers, 
Orchestrinas, or even Barrel-organs?  No, not one.  Yes, I remember 
one.  One barrel-organ and a dancing-monkey - sportive by nature, 
but fast fading into a dull, lumpish monkey, of the Utilitarian 
school.  Beyond that, nothing lively; no, not so much as a white 
mouse in a twirling cage.

Are there no amusements?  Yes.  There is a lecture-room across the 
way, from which that glare of light proceeds, and there may be 
evening service for the ladies thrice a week, or oftener.  For the 
young gentlemen, there is the counting-house, the store, the bar-
room:  the latter, as you may see through these windows, pretty 
full.  Hark! to the clinking sound of hammers breaking lumps of 
ice, and to the cool gurgling of the pounded bits, as, in the 
process of mixing, they are poured from glass to glass!  No 
amusements?  What are these suckers of cigars and swallowers of 
strong drinks, whose hats and legs we see in every possible variety 
of twist, doing, but amusing themselves?  What are the fifty 
newspapers, which those precocious urchins are bawling down the 
street, and which are kept filed within, what are they but 
amusements?  Not vapid, waterish amusements, but good strong stuff; 
dealing in round abuse and blackguard names; pulling off the roofs 
of private houses, as the Halting Devil did in Spain; pimping and 
pandering for all degrees of vicious taste, and gorging with coined 
lies the most voracious maw; imputing to every man in public life 
the coarsest and the vilest motives; scaring away from the stabbed 
and prostrate body-politic, every Samaritan of clear conscience and 
good deeds; and setting on, with yell and whistle and the clapping 
of foul hands, the vilest vermin and worst birds of prey. - No 
amusements!

Let us go on again; and passing this wilderness of an hotel with 
stores about its base, like some Continental theatre, or the London 
Opera House shorn of its colonnade, plunge into the Five Points.  
But it is needful, first, that we take as our escort these two 
heads of the police, whom you would know for sharp and well-trained 
officers if you met them in the Great Desert.  So true it is, that 
certain pursuits, wherever carried on, will stamp men with the same 
character.  These two might have been begotten, born, and bred, in 
Bow Street.

We have seen no beggars in the streets by night or day; but of 
other kinds of strollers, plenty.  Poverty, wretchedness, and vice, 
are rife enough where we are going now.

This is the place:  these narrow ways, diverging to the right and 
left, and reeking everywhere with dirt and filth.  Such lives as 
are led here, bear the same fruits here as elsewhere.  The coarse 
and bloated faces at the doors, have counterparts at home, and all 
the wide world over.  Debauchery has made the very houses 
prematurely old.  See how the rotten beams are tumbling down, and 
how the patched and broken windows seem to scowl dimly, like eyes 
that have been hurt in drunken frays.  Many of those pigs live 
here.  Do they ever wonder why their masters walk upright in lieu 
of going on all-fours? and why they talk instead of grunting?

So far, nearly every house is a low tavern; and on the bar-room 
walls, are coloured prints of Washington, and Queen Victoria of 
England, and the American Eagle.  Among the pigeon-holes that hold 
the bottles, are pieces of plate-glass and coloured paper, for 
there is, in some sort, a taste for decoration, even here.  And as 
seamen frequent these haunts, there are maritime pictures by the 
dozen:  of partings between sailors and their lady-loves, portraits 
of William, of the ballad, and his Black-Eyed Susan; of Will Watch, 
the Bold Smuggler; of Paul Jones the Pirate, and the like:  on 
which the painted eyes of Queen Victoria, and of Washington to 
boot, rest in as strange companionship, as on most of the scenes 
that are enacted in their wondering presence.

What place is this, to which the squalid street conducts us?  A 
kind of square of leprous houses, some of which are attainable only 
by crazy wooden stairs without.  What lies beyond this tottering 
flight of steps, that creak beneath our tread? - a miserable room, 
lighted by one dim candle, and destitute of all comfort, save that 
which may be hidden in a wretched bed.  Beside it, sits a man:  his 
elbows on his knees:  his forehead hidden in his hands.  'What ails 
that man?' asks the foremost officer.  'Fever,' he sullenly 
replies, without looking up.  Conceive the fancies of a feverish 
brain, in such a place as this!

Ascend these pitch-dark stairs, heedful of a false footing on the 
trembling boards, and grope your way with me into this wolfish den, 
where neither ray of light nor breath of air, appears to come.  A 
negro lad, startled from his sleep by the officer's voice - he 
knows it well - but comforted by his assurance that he has not come 
on business, officiously bestirs himself to light a candle.  The 
match flickers for a moment, and shows great mounds of dusty rags 
upon the ground; then dies away and leaves a denser darkness than 
before, if there can be degrees in such extremes.  He stumbles down 
the stairs and presently comes back, shading a flaring taper with 
his hand.  Then the mounds of rags are seen to be astir, and rise 
slowly up, and the floor is covered with heaps of negro women, 
waking from their sleep:  their white teeth chattering, and their 
bright eyes glistening and winking on all sides with surprise and 
fear, like the countless repetition of one astonished African face 
in some strange mirror.

Mount up these other stairs with no less caution (there are traps 
and pitfalls here, for those who are not so well escorted as 
ourselves) into the housetop; where the bare beams and rafters meet 
overhead, and calm night looks down through the crevices in the 
roof.  Open the door of one of these cramped hutches full of 
sleeping negroes.  Pah!  They have a charcoal fire within; there is 
a smell of singeing clothes, or flesh, so close they gather round 
the brazier; and vapours issue forth that blind and suffocate.  
From every corner, as you glance about you in these dark retreats, 
some figure crawls half-awakened, as if the judgment-hour were near 
at hand, and every obscene grave were giving up its dead.  Where 
dogs would howl to lie, women, and men, and boys slink off to 
sleep, forcing the dislodged rats to move away in quest of better 
lodgings.

Here too are lanes and alleys, paved with mud knee-deep, 
underground chambers, where they dance and game; the walls bedecked 
with rough designs of ships, and forts, and flags, and American 
eagles out of number:  ruined houses, open to the street, whence, 
through wide gaps in the walls, other ruins loom upon the eye, as 
though the world of vice and misery had nothing else to show:  
hideous tenements which take their name from robbery and murder:  
all that is loathsome, drooping, and decayed is here.

Our leader has his hand upon the latch of 'Almack's,' and calls to 
us from the bottom of the steps; for the assembly-room of the Five 
Point fashionables is approached by a descent.  Shall we go in?  It 
is but a moment.

Heyday! the landlady of Almack's thrives!  A buxom fat mulatto 
woman, with sparkling eyes, whose head is daintily ornamented with 
a handkerchief of many colours.  Nor is the landlord much behind 
her in his finery, being attired in a smart blue jacket, like a 
ship's steward, with a thick gold ring upon his little finger, and 
round his neck a gleaming golden watch-guard.  How glad he is to 
see us!  What will we please to call for?  A dance?  It shall be 
done directly, sir:  'a regular break-down.'

The corpulent black fiddler, and his friend who plays the 
tambourine, stamp upon the boarding of the small raised orchestra 
in which they sit, and play a lively measure.  Five or six couple 
come upon the floor, marshalled by a lively young negro, who is the 
wit of the assembly, and the greatest dancer known.  He never 
leaves off making queer faces, and is the delight of all the rest, 
who grin from ear to ear incessantly.  Among the dancers are two 
young mulatto girls, with large, black, drooping eyes, and head-
gear after the fashion of the hostess, who are as shy, or feign to 
be, as though they never danced before, and so look down before the 
visitors, that their partners can see nothing but the long fringed 
lashes.

But the dance commences.  Every gentleman sets as long as he likes 
to the opposite lady, and the opposite lady to him, and all are so 
long about it that the sport begins to languish, when suddenly the 
lively hero dashes in to the rescue.  Instantly the fiddler grins, 
and goes at it tooth and nail; there is new energy in the 
tambourine; new laughter in the dancers; new smiles in the 
landlady; new confidence in the landlord; new brightness in the 
very candles.

Single shuffle, double shuffle, cut and cross-cut; snapping his 
fingers, rolling his eyes, turning in his knees, presenting the 
backs of his legs in front, spinning about on his toes and heels 
like nothing but the man's fingers on the tambourine; dancing with 
two left legs, two right legs, two wooden legs, two wire legs, two 
spring legs - all sorts of legs and no legs - what is this to him?  
And in what walk of life, or dance of life, does man ever get such 
stimulating applause as thunders about him, when, having danced his 
partner off her feet, and himself too, he finishes by leaping 
gloriously on the bar-counter, and calling for something to drink, 
with the chuckle of a million of counterfeit Jim Crows, in one 
inimitable sound!

The air, even in these distempered parts, is fresh after the 
stifling atmosphere of the houses; and now, as we emerge into a 
broader street, it blows upon us with a purer breath, and the stars 
look bright again.  Here are The Tombs once more.  The city watch-
house is a part of the building.  It follows naturally on the 
sights we have just left.  Let us see that, and then to bed.

What! do you thrust your common offenders against the police 
discipline of the town, into such holes as these?  Do men and 
women, against whom no crime is proved, lie here all night in 
perfect darkness, surrounded by the noisome vapours which encircle 
that flagging lamp you light us with, and breathing this filthy and 
offensive stench!  Why, such indecent and disgusting dungeons as 
these cells, would bring disgrace upon the most despotic empire in 
the world!  Look at them, man - you, who see them every night, and 
keep the keys.  Do you see what they are?  Do you know how drains 
are made below the streets, and wherein these human sewers differ, 
except in being always stagnant?

Well, he don't know.  He has had five-and-twenty young women locked 
up in this very cell at one time, and you'd hardly realise what 
handsome faces there were among 'em.

In God's name! shut the door upon the wretched creature who is in 
it now, and put its screen before a place, quite unsurpassed in all 
the vice, neglect, and devilry, of the worst old town in Europe.

Are people really left all night, untried, in those black sties? - 
Every night.  The watch is set at seven in the evening.  The 
magistrate opens his court at five in the morning.  That is the 
earliest hour at which the first prisoner can be released; and if 
an officer appear against him, he is not taken out till nine 
o'clock or ten. - But if any one among them die in the interval, as 
one man did, not long ago?  Then he is half-eaten by the rats in an 
hour's time; as that man was; and there an end.

What is this intolerable tolling of great bells, and crashing of 
wheels, and shouting in the distance?  A fire.  And what that deep 
red light in the opposite direction?  Another fire.  And what these 
charred and blackened walls we stand before?  A dwelling where a 
fire has been.  It was more than hinted, in an official report, not 
long ago, that some of these conflagrations were not wholly 
accidental, and that speculation and enterprise found a field of 
exertion, even in flames:  but be this as it may, there was a fire 
last night, there are two to-night, and you may lay an even wager 
there will be at least one, to-morrow.  So, carrying that with us 
for our comfort, let us say, Good night, and climb up-stairs to 
bed.

* * * * * *

One day, during my stay in New York, I paid a visit to the 
different public institutions on Long Island, or Rhode Island:  I 
forget which.  One of them is a Lunatic Asylum.  The building is 
handsome; and is remarkable for a spacious and elegant staircase.  
The whole structure is not yet finished, but it is already one of 
considerable size and extent, and is capable of accommodating a 
very large number of patients.

I cannot say that I derived much comfort from the inspection of 
this charity.  The different wards might have been cleaner and 
better ordered; I saw nothing of that salutary system which had 
impressed me so favourably elsewhere; and everything had a 
lounging, listless, madhouse air, which was very painful.  The 
moping idiot, cowering down with long dishevelled hair; the 
gibbering maniac, with his hideous laugh and pointed finger; the 
vacant eye, the fierce wild face, the gloomy picking of the hands 
and lips, and munching of the nails:  there they were all, without 
disguise, in naked ugliness and horror.  In the dining-room, a 
bare, dull, dreary place, with nothing for the eye to rest on but 
the empty walls, a woman was locked up alone.  She was bent, they 
told me, on committing suicide.  If anything could have 
strengthened her in her resolution, it would certainly have been 
the insupportable monotony of such an existence.

The terrible crowd with which these halls and galleries were 
filled, so shocked me, that I abridged my stay within the shortest 
limits, and declined to see that portion of the building in which 
the refractory and violent were under closer restraint.  I have no 
doubt that the gentleman who presided over this establishment at 
the time I write of, was competent to manage it, and had done all 
in his power to promote its usefulness:  but will it be believed 
that the miserable strife of Party feeling is carried even into 
this sad refuge of afflicted and degraded humanity?  Will it be 
believed that the eyes which are to watch over and control the 
wanderings of minds on which the most dreadful visitation to which 
our nature is exposed has fallen, must wear the glasses of some 
wretched side in Politics?  Will it be believed that the governor 
of such a house as this, is appointed, and deposed, and changed 
perpetually, as Parties fluctuate and vary, and as their despicable 
weathercocks are blown this way or that?  A hundred times in every 
week, some new most paltry exhibition of that narrow-minded and 
injurious Party Spirit, which is the Simoom of America, sickening 
and blighting everything of wholesome life within its reach, was 
forced upon my notice; but I never turned my back upon it with 
feelings of such deep disgust and measureless contempt, as when I 
crossed the threshold of this madhouse.

At a short distance from this building is another called the Alms 
House, that is to say, the workhouse of New York.  This is a large 
Institution also:  lodging, I believe, when I was there, nearly a 
thousand poor.  It was badly ventilated, and badly lighted; was not 
too clean; - and impressed me, on the whole, very uncomfortably.  
But it must be remembered that New York, as a great emporium of 
commerce, and as a place of general resort, not only from all parts 
of the States, but from most parts of the world, has always a large 
pauper population to provide for; and labours, therefore, under 
peculiar difficulties in this respect.  Nor must it be forgotten 
that New York is a large town, and that in all large towns a vast 
amount of good and evil is intermixed and jumbled up together.

In the same neighbourhood is the Farm, where young orphans are 
nursed and bred.  I did not see it, but I believe it is well 
conducted; and I can the more easily credit it, from knowing how 
mindful they usually are, in America, of that beautiful passage in 
the Litany which remembers all sick persons and young children.

I was taken to these Institutions by water, in a boat belonging to 
the Island jail, and rowed by a crew of prisoners, who were dressed 
in a striped uniform of black and buff, in which they looked like 
faded tigers.  They took me, by the same conveyance, to the jail 
itself.

It is an old prison, and quite a pioneer establishment, on the plan 
I have already described.  I was glad to hear this, for it is 
unquestionably a very indifferent one.  The most is made, however, 
of the means it possesses, and it is as well regulated as such a 
place can be.

The women work in covered sheds, erected for that purpose.  If I 
remember right, there are no shops for the men, but be that as it 
may, the greater part of them labour in certain stone-quarries near 
at hand.  The day being very wet indeed, this labour was suspended, 
and the prisoners were in their cells.  Imagine these cells, some 
two or three hundred in number, and in every one a man locked up; 
this one at his door for air, with his hands thrust through the 
grate; this one in bed (in the middle of the day, remember); and 
this one flung down in a heap upon the ground, with his head 
against the bars, like a wild beast.  Make the rain pour down, 
outside, in torrents.  Put the everlasting stove in the midst; hot, 
and suffocating, and vaporous, as a witch's cauldron.  Add a 
collection of gentle odours, such as would arise from a thousand 
mildewed umbrellas, wet through, and a thousand buck-baskets, full 
of half-washed linen - and there is the prison, as it was that day.

The prison for the State at Sing Sing is, on the other hand, a 
model jail.  That, and Auburn, are, I believe, the largest and best 
examples of the silent system.

In another part of the city, is the Refuge for the Destitute:  an 
Institution whose object is to reclaim youthful offenders, male and 
female, black and white, without distinction; to teach them useful 
trades, apprentice them to respectable masters, and make them 
worthy members of society.  Its design, it will be seen, is similar 
to that at Boston; and it is a no less meritorious and admirable 
establishment.  A suspicion crossed my mind during my inspection of 
this noble charity, whether the superintendent had quite sufficient 
knowledge of the world and worldly characters; and whether he did 
not commit a great mistake in treating some young girls, who were 
to all intents and purposes, by their years and their past lives, 
women, as though they were little children; which certainly had a 
ludicrous effect in my eyes, and, or I am much mistaken, in theirs 
also.  As the Institution, however, is always under a vigilant 
examination of a body of gentlemen of great intelligence and 
experience, it cannot fail to be well conducted; and whether I am 
right or wrong in this slight particular, is unimportant to its 
deserts and character, which it would be difficult to estimate too 
highly.

In addition to these establishments, there are in New York, 
excellent hospitals and schools, literary institutions and 
libraries; an admirable fire department (as indeed it should be, 
having constant practice), and charities of every sort and kind.  
In the suburbs there is a spacious cemetery:  unfinished yet, but 
every day improving.  The saddest tomb I saw there was 'The 
Strangers' Grave.  Dedicated to the different hotels in this city.'

There are three principal theatres.  Two of them, the Park and the 
Bowery, are large, elegant, and handsome buildings, and are, I 
grieve to write it, generally deserted.  The third, the Olympic, is 
a tiny show-box for vaudevilles and burlesques.  It is singularly 
well conducted by Mr. Mitchell, a comic actor of great quiet humour 
and originality, who is well remembered and esteemed by London 
playgoers.  I am happy to report of this deserving gentleman, that 
his benches are usually well filled, and that his theatre rings 
with merriment every night.  I had almost forgotten a small summer 
theatre, called Niblo's, with gardens and open air amusements 
attached; but I believe it is not exempt from the general 
depression under which Theatrical Property, or what is humorously 
called by that name, unfortunately labours.

The country round New York is surpassingly and exquisitely 
picturesque.  The climate, as I have already intimated, is somewhat 
of the warmest.  What it would be, without the sea breezes which 
come from its beautiful Bay in the evening time, I will not throw 
myself or my readers into a fever by inquiring.

The tone of the best society in this city, is like that of Boston; 
here and there, it may be, with a greater infusion of the 
mercantile spirit, but generally polished and refined, and always 
most hospitable.  The houses and tables are elegant; the hours 
later and more rakish; and there is, perhaps, a greater spirit of 
contention in reference to appearances, and the display of wealth 
and costly living.  The ladies are singularly beautiful.

Before I left New York I made arrangements for securing a passage 
home in the George Washington packet ship, which was advertised to 
sail in June:  that being the month in which I had determined, if 
prevented by no accident in the course of my ramblings, to leave 
America.

I never thought that going back to England, returning to all who 
are dear to me, and to pursuits that have insensibly grown to be a 
part of my nature, I could have felt so much sorrow as I endured, 
when I parted at last, on board this ship, with the friends who had 
accompanied me from this city.  I never thought the name of any 
place, so far away and so lately known, could ever associate itself 
in my mind with the crowd of affectionate remembrances that now 
cluster about it.  There are those in this city who would brighten, 
to me, the darkest winter-day that ever glimmered and went out in 
Lapland; and before whose presence even Home grew dim, when they 
and I exchanged that painful word which mingles with our every 
thought and deed; which haunts our cradle-heads in infancy, and 
closes up the vista of our lives in age.




CHAPTER VII - PHILADELPHIA, AND ITS SOLITARY PRISON



THE journey from New York to Philadelphia, is made by railroad, and 
two ferries; and usually occupies between five and six hours.  It 
was a fine evening when we were passengers in the train:  and 
watching the bright sunset from a little window near the door by 
which we sat, my attention was attracted to a remarkable appearance 
issuing from the windows of the gentleman's car immediately in 
front of us, which I supposed for some time was occasioned by a 
number of industrious persons inside, ripping open feather-beds, 
and giving the feathers to the wind.  At length it occurred to me 
that they were only spitting, which was indeed the case; though how 
any number of passengers which it was possible for that car to 
contain, could have maintained such a playful and incessant shower 
of expectoration, I am still at a loss to understand:  
notwithstanding the experience in all salivatory phenomena which I 
afterwards acquired.

I made acquaintance, on this journey, with a mild and modest young 
quaker, who opened the discourse by informing me, in a grave 
whisper, that his grandfather was the inventor of cold-drawn castor 
oil.  I mention the circumstance here, thinking it probable that 
this is the first occasion on which the valuable medicine in 
question was ever used as a conversational aperient.

We reached the city, late that night.  Looking out of my chamber-
window, before going to bed, I saw, on the opposite side of the 
way, a handsome building of white marble, which had a mournful 
ghost-like aspect, dreary to behold.  I attributed this to the 
sombre influence of the night, and on rising in the morning looked 
out again, expecting to see its steps and portico thronged with 
groups of people passing in and out.  The door was still tight 
shut, however; the same cold cheerless air prevailed:  and the 
building looked as if the marble statue of Don Guzman could alone 
have any business to transact within its gloomy walls.  I hastened 
to inquire its name and purpose, and then my surprise vanished.  It 
was the Tomb of many fortunes; the Great Catacomb of investment; 
the memorable United States Bank.

The stoppage of this bank, with all its ruinous consequences, had 
cast (as I was told on every side) a gloom on Philadelphia, under 
the depressing effect of which it yet laboured.  It certainly did 
seem rather dull and out of spirits.

It is a handsome city, but distractingly regular.  After walking 
about it for an hour or two, I felt that I would have given the 
world for a crooked street.  The collar of my coat appeared to 
stiffen, and the brim of my bat to expand, beneath its quakery 
influence.  My hair shrunk into a sleek short crop, my hands folded 
themselves upon my breast of their own calm accord, and thoughts of 
taking lodgings in Mark Lane over against the Market Place, and of 
making a large fortune by speculations in corn, came over me 
involuntarily.

Philadelphia is most bountifully provided with fresh water, which 
is showered and jerked about, and turned on, and poured off, 
everywhere.  The Waterworks, which are on a height near the city, 
are no less ornamental than useful, being tastefully laid out as a 
public garden, and kept in the best and neatest order.  The river 
is dammed at this point, and forced by its own power into certain 
high tanks or reservoirs, whence the whole city, to the top stories 
of the houses, is supplied at a very trifling expense.

There are various public institutions.  Among them a most excellent 
Hospital - a quaker establishment, but not sectarian in the great 
benefits it confers; a quiet, quaint old Library, named after 
Franklin; a handsome Exchange and Post Office; and so forth.  In 
connection with the quaker Hospital, there is a picture by West, 
which is exhibited for the benefit of the funds of the institution.  
The subject is, our Saviour healing the sick, and it is, perhaps, 
as favourable a specimen of the master as can be seen anywhere.  
Whether this be high or low praise, depends upon the reader's 
taste.

In the same room, there is a very characteristic and life-like 
portrait by Mr. Sully, a distinguished American artist.

My stay in Philadelphia was very short, but what I saw of its 
society, I greatly liked.  Treating of its general characteristics, 
I should be disposed to say that it is more provincial than Boston 
or New York, and that there is afloat in the fair city, an 
assumption of taste and criticism, savouring rather of those 
genteel discussions upon the same themes, in connection with 
Shakspeare and the Musical Glasses, of which we read in the Vicar 
of Wakefield.  Near the city, is a most splendid unfinished marble 
structure for the Girard College, founded by a deceased gentleman 
of that name and of enormous wealth, which, if completed according 
to the original design, will be perhaps the richest edifice of 
modern times.  But the bequest is involved in legal disputes, and 
pending them the work has stopped; so that like many other great 
undertakings in America, even this is rather going to be done one 
of these days, than doing now.

In the outskirts, stands a great prison, called the Eastern 
Penitentiary:  conducted on a plan peculiar to the state of 
Pennsylvania.  The system here, is rigid, strict, and hopeless 
solitary confinement.  I believe it, in its effects, to be cruel 
and wrong.

In its intention, I am well convinced that it is kind, humane, and 
meant for reformation; but I am persuaded that those who devised 
this system of Prison Discipline, and those benevolent gentlemen 
who carry it into execution, do not know what it is that they are 
doing.  I believe that very few men are capable of estimating the 
immense amount of torture and agony which this dreadful punishment, 
prolonged for years, inflicts upon the sufferers; and in guessing 
at it myself, and in reasoning from what I have seen written upon 
their faces, and what to my certain knowledge they feel within, I 
am only the more convinced that there is a depth of terrible 
endurance in it which none but the sufferers themselves can fathom, 
and which no man has a right to inflict upon his fellow-creature.  
I hold this slow and daily tampering with the mysteries of the 
brain, to be immeasurably worse than any torture of the body:  and 
because its ghastly signs and tokens are not so palpable to the eye 
and sense of touch as scars upon the flesh; because its wounds are 
not upon the surface, and it extorts few cries that human ears can 
hear; therefore I the more denounce it, as a secret punishment 
which slumbering humanity is not roused up to stay.  I hesitated 
once, debating with myself, whether, if I had the power of saying 
'Yes' or 'No,' I would allow it to be tried in certain cases, where 
the terms of imprisonment were short; but now, I solemnly declare, 
that with no rewards or honours could I walk a happy man beneath 
the open sky by day, or lie me down upon my bed at night, with the 
consciousness that one human creature, for any length of time, no 
matter what, lay suffering this unknown punishment in his silent 
cell, and I the cause, or I consenting to it in the least degree.

I was accompanied to this prison by two gentlemen officially 
connected with its management, and passed the day in going from 
cell to cell, and talking with the inmates.  Every facility was 
afforded me, that the utmost courtesy could suggest.  Nothing was 
concealed or hidden from my view, and every piece of information 
that I sought, was openly and frankly given.  The perfect order of 
the building cannot be praised too highly, and of the excellent 
motives of all who are immediately concerned in the administration 
of the system, there can be no kind of question.

Between the body of the prison and the outer wall, there is a 
spacious garden.  Entering it, by a wicket in the massive gate, we 
pursued the path before us to its other termination, and passed 
into a large chamber, from which seven long passages radiate.  On 
either side of each, is a long, long row of low cell doors, with a 
certain number over every one.  Above, a gallery of cells like 
those below, except that they have no narrow yard attached (as 
those in the ground tier have), and are somewhat smaller.  The 
possession of two of these, is supposed to compensate for the 
absence of so much air and exercise as can be had in the dull strip 
attached to each of the others, in an hour's time every day; and 
therefore every prisoner in this upper story has two cells, 
adjoining and communicating with, each other.

Standing at the central point, and looking down these dreary 
passages, the dull repose and quiet that prevails, is awful.  
Occasionally, there is a drowsy sound from some lone weaver's 
shuttle, or shoemaker's last, but it is stifled by the thick walls 
and heavy dungeon-door, and only serves to make the general 
stillness more profound.  Over the head and face of every prisoner 
who comes into this melancholy house, a black hood is drawn; and in 
this dark shroud, an emblem of the curtain dropped between him and 
the living world, he is led to the cell from which he never again 
comes forth, until his whole term of imprisonment has expired.  He 
never hears of wife and children; home or friends; the life or 
death of any single creature.  He sees the prison-officers, but 
with that exception he never looks upon a human countenance, or 
hears a human voice.  He is a man buried alive; to be dug out in 
the slow round of years; and in the mean time dead to everything 
but torturing anxieties and horrible despair.

His name, and crime, and term of suffering, are unknown, even to 
the officer who delivers him his daily food.  There is a number 
over his cell-door, and in a book of which the governor of the 
prison has one copy, and the moral instructor another:  this is the 
index of his history.  Beyond these pages the prison has no record 
of his existence:  and though he live to be in the same cell ten 
weary years, he has no means of knowing, down to the very last 
hour, in which part of the building it is situated; what kind of 
men there are about him; whether in the long winter nights there 
are living people near, or he is in some lonely corner of the great 
jail, with walls, and passages, and iron doors between him and the 
nearest sharer in its solitary horrors.

Every cell has double doors:  the outer one of sturdy oak, the 
other of grated iron, wherein there is a trap through which his 
food is handed.  He has a Bible, and a slate and pencil, and, under 
certain restrictions, has sometimes other books, provided for the 
purpose, and pen and ink and paper.  His razor, plate, and can, and 
basin, hang upon the wall, or shine upon the little shelf.  Fresh 
water is laid on in every cell, and he can draw it at his pleasure.  
During the day, his bedstead turns up against the wall, and leaves 
more space for him to work in.  His loom, or bench, or wheel, is 
there; and there he labours, sleeps and wakes, and counts the 
seasons as they change, and grows old.

The first man I saw, was seated at his loom, at work.  He had been 
there six years, and was to remain, I think, three more.  He had 
been convicted as a receiver of stolen goods, but even after his 
long imprisonment, denied his guilt, and said he had been hardly 
dealt by.  It was his second offence.

He stopped his work when we went in, took off his spectacles, and 
answered freely to everything that was said to him, but always with 
a strange kind of pause first, and in a low, thoughtful voice.  He 
wore a paper hat of his own making, and was pleased to have it 
noticed and commanded.  He had very ingeniously manufactured a sort 
of Dutch clock from some disregarded odds and ends; and his 
vinegar-bottle served for the pendulum.  Seeing me interested in 
this contrivance, he looked up at it with a great deal of pride, 
and said that he had been thinking of improving it, and that he 
hoped the hammer and a little piece of broken glass beside it 
'would play music before long.'  He had extracted some colours from 
the yarn with which he worked, and painted a few poor figures on 
the wall.  One, of a female, over the door, he called 'The Lady of 
the Lake.'

He smiled as I looked at these contrivances to while away the time; 
but when I looked from them to him, I saw that his lip trembled, 
and could have counted the beating of his heart.  I forget how it 
came about, but some allusion was made to his having a wife.  He 
shook his head at the word, turned aside, and covered his face with 
his hands.

'But you are resigned now!' said one of the gentlemen after a short 
pause, during which he had resumed his former manner.  He answered 
with a sigh that seemed quite reckless in its hopelessness, 'Oh 
yes, oh yes!  I am resigned to it.'  'And are a better man, you 
think?'  'Well, I hope so:  I'm sure I hope I may be.'  'And time 
goes pretty quickly?'  'Time is very long gentlemen, within these 
four walls!'

He gazed about him - Heaven only knows how wearily! - as he said 
these words; and in the act of doing so, fell into a strange stare 
as if he had forgotten something.  A moment afterwards he sighed 
heavily, put on his spectacles, and went about his work again.

In another cell, there was a German, sentenced to five years' 
imprisonment for larceny, two of which had just expired.  With 
colours procured in the same manner, he had painted every inch of 
the walls and ceiling quite beautifully.  He had laid out the few 
feet of ground, behind, with exquisite neatness, and had made a 
little bed in the centre, that looked, by-the-bye, like a grave.  
The taste and ingenuity he had displayed in everything were most 
extraordinary; and yet a more dejected, heart-broken, wretched 
creature, it would be difficult to imagine.  I never saw such a 
picture of forlorn affliction and distress of mind.  My heart bled 
for him; and when the tears ran down his cheeks, and he took one of 
the visitors aside, to ask, with his trembling hands nervously 
clutching at his coat to detain him, whether there was no hope of 
his dismal sentence being commuted, the spectacle was really too 
painful to witness.  I never saw or heard of any kind of misery 
that impressed me more than the wretchedness of this man.

In a third cell, was a tall, strong black, a burglar, working at 
his proper trade of making screws and the like.  His time was 
nearly out.  He was not only a very dexterous thief, but was 
notorious for his boldness and hardihood, and for the number of his 
previous convictions.  He entertained us with a long account of his 
achievements, which he narrated with such infinite relish, that he 
actually seemed to lick his lips as he told us racy anecdotes of 
stolen plate, and of old ladies whom he had watched as they sat at 
windows in silver spectacles (he had plainly had an eye to their 
metal even from the other side of the street) and had afterwards 
robbed.  This fellow, upon the slightest encouragement, would have 
mingled with his professional recollections the most detestable 
cant; but I am very much mistaken if he could have surpassed the 
unmitigated hypocrisy with which he declared that he blessed the 
day on which he came into that prison, and that he never would 
commit another robbery as long as he lived.

There was one man who was allowed, as an indulgence, to keep 
rabbits.  His room having rather a close smell in consequence, they 
called to him at the door to come out into the passage.  He 
complied of course, and stood shading his haggard face in the 
unwonted sunlight of the great window, looking as wan and unearthly 
as if he had been summoned from the grave.  He had a white rabbit 
in his breast; and when the little creature, getting down upon the 
ground, stole back into the cell, and he, being dismissed, crept 
timidly after it, I thought it would have been very hard to say in 
what respect the man was the nobler animal of the two.

There was an English thief, who had been there but a few days out 
of seven years:  a villainous, low-browed, thin-lipped fellow, with 
a white face; who had as yet no relish for visitors, and who, but 
for the additional penalty, would have gladly stabbed me with his 
shoemaker's knife.  There was another German who had entered the 
jail but yesterday, and who started from his bed when we looked in, 
and pleaded, in his broken English, very hard for work.  There was 
a poet, who after doing two days' work in every four-and-twenty 
hours, one for himself and one for the prison, wrote verses about 
ships (he was by trade a mariner), and 'the maddening wine-cup,' 
and his friends at home.  There were very many of them.  Some 
reddened at the sight of visitors, and some turned very pale.  Some 
two or three had prisoner nurses with them, for they were very 
sick; and one, a fat old negro whose leg had been taken off within 
the jail, had for his attendant a classical scholar and an 
accomplished surgeon, himself a prisoner likewise.  Sitting upon 
the stairs, engaged in some slight work, was a pretty coloured boy.  
'Is there no refuge for young criminals in Philadelphia, then?' 
said I.  'Yes, but only for white children.'  Noble aristocracy in 
crime

There was a sailor who had been there upwards of eleven years, and 
who in a few months' time would be free.  Eleven years of solitary 
confinement!

'I am very glad to hear your time is nearly out.'  What does he 
say?  Nothing.  Why does he stare at his hands, and pick the flesh 
upon his fingers, and raise his eyes for an instant, every now and 
then, to those bare walls which have seen his head turn grey?  It 
is a way he has sometimes.

Does he never look men in the face, and does he always pluck at 
those hands of his, as though he were bent on parting skin and 
bone?  It is his humour:  nothing more.

It is his humour too, to say that he does not look forward to going 
out; that he is not glad the time is drawing near; that he did look 
forward to it once, but that was very long ago; that he has lost 
all care for everything.  It is his humour to be a helpless, 
crushed, and broken man.  And, Heaven be his witness that he has 
his humour thoroughly gratified!

There were three young women in adjoining cells, all convicted at 
the same time of a conspiracy to rob their prosecutor.  In the 
silence and solitude of their lives they had grown to be quite 
beautiful.  Their looks were very sad, and might have moved the 
sternest visitor to tears, but not to that kind of sorrow which the 
contemplation of the men awakens.  One was a young girl; not 
twenty, as I recollect; whose snow-white room was hung with the 
work of some former prisoner, and upon whose downcast face the sun 
in all its splendour shone down through the high chink in the wall, 
where one narrow strip of bright blue sky was visible.  She was 
very penitent and quiet; had come to be resigned, she said (and I 
believe her); and had a mind at peace.  'In a word, you are happy 
here?' said one of my companions.  She struggled - she did struggle 
very hard - to answer, Yes; but raising her eyes, and meeting that 
glimpse of freedom overhead, she burst into tears, and said, 'She 
tried to be; she uttered no complaint; but it was natural that she 
should sometimes long to go out of that one cell:  she could not 
help THAT,' she sobbed, poor thing!

I went from cell to cell that day; and every face I saw, or word I 
heard, or incident I noted, is present to my mind in all its 
painfulness.  But let me pass them by, for one, more pleasant, 
glance of a prison on the same plan which I afterwards saw at 
Pittsburg.

When I had gone over that, in the same manner, I asked the governor 
if he had any person in his charge who was shortly going out.  He 
had one, he said, whose time was up next day; but he had only been 
a prisoner two years.

Two years!  I looked back through two years of my own life - out of 
jail, prosperous, happy, surrounded by blessings, comforts, good 
fortune - and thought how wide a gap it was, and how long those two 
years passed in solitary captivity would have been.  I have the 
face of this man, who was going to be released next day, before me 
now.  It is almost more memorable in its happiness than the other 
faces in their misery.  How easy and how natural it was for him to 
say that the system was a good one; and that the time went 'pretty 
quick - considering;' and that when a man once felt that he had 
offended the law, and must satisfy it, 'he got along, somehow:' and 
so forth!

'What did he call you back to say to you, in that strange flutter?' 
I asked of my conductor, when he had locked the door and joined me 
in the passage.

'Oh!  That he was afraid the soles of his boots were not fit for 
walking, as they were a good deal worn when he came in; and that he 
would thank me very much to have them mended, ready.'

Those boots had been taken off his feet, and put away with the rest 
of his clothes, two years before!

I took that opportunity of inquiring how they conducted themselves 
immediately before going out; adding that I presumed they trembled 
very much.

'Well, it's not so much a trembling,' was the answer - 'though they 
do quiver - as a complete derangement of the nervous system.  They 
can't sign their names to the book; sometimes can't even hold the 
pen; look about 'em without appearing to know why, or where they 
are; and sometimes get up and sit down again, twenty times in a 
minute.  This is when they're in the office, where they are taken 
with the hood on, as they were brought in.  When they get outside 
the gate, they stop, and look first one way and then the other; not 
knowing which to take.  Sometimes they stagger as if they were 
drunk, and sometimes are forced to lean against the fence, they're 
so bad:- but they clear off in course of time.'

As I walked among these solitary cells, and looked at the faces of 
the men within them, I tried to picture to myself the thoughts and 
feelings natural to their condition.  I imagined the hood just 
taken off, and the scene of their captivity disclosed to them in 
all its dismal monotony.

At first, the man is stunned.  His confinement is a hideous vision; 
and his old life a reality.  He throws himself upon his bed, and 
lies there abandoned to despair.  By degrees the insupportable 
solitude and barrenness of the place rouses him from this stupor, 
and when the trap in his grated door is opened, he humbly begs and 
prays for work.  'Give me some work to do, or I shall go raving 
mad!'

He has it; and by fits and starts applies himself to labour; but 
every now and then there comes upon him a burning sense of the 
years that must be wasted in that stone coffin, and an agony so 
piercing in the recollection of those who are hidden from his view 
and knowledge, that he starts from his seat, and striding up and 
down the narrow room with both hands clasped on his uplifted head, 
hears spirits tempting him to beat his brains out on the wall.

Again he falls upon his bed, and lies there, moaning.  Suddenly he 
starts up, wondering whether any other man is near; whether there 
is another cell like that on either side of him:  and listens 
keenly.

There is no sound, but other prisoners may be near for all that.  
He remembers to have heard once, when he little thought of coming 
here himself, that the cells were so constructed that the prisoners 
could not hear each other, though the officers could hear them.

Where is the nearest man - upon the right, or on the left? or is 
there one in both directions?  Where is he sitting now - with his 
face to the light? or is he walking to and fro?  How is he dressed?  
Has he been here long?  Is he much worn away?  Is he very white and 
spectre-like?  Does HE think of his neighbour too?

Scarcely venturing to breathe, and listening while he thinks, he 
conjures up a figure with his back towards him, and imagines it 
moving about in this next cell.  He has no idea of the face, but he 
is certain of the dark form of a stooping man.  In the cell upon 
the other side, he puts another figure, whose face is hidden from 
him also.  Day after day, and often when he wakes up in the middle 
of the night, he thinks of these two men until he is almost 
distracted.  He never changes them.  There they are always as he 
first imagined them - an old man on the right; a younger man upon 
the left - whose hidden features torture him to death, and have a 
mystery that makes him tremble.

The weary days pass on with solemn pace, like mourners at a 
funeral; and slowly he begins to feel that the white walls of the 
cell have something dreadful in them:  that their colour is 
horrible:  that their smooth surface chills his blood:  that there 
is one hateful corner which torments him.  Every morning when he 
wakes, he hides his head beneath the coverlet, and shudders to see 
the ghastly ceiling looking down upon him.  The blessed light of 
day itself peeps in, an ugly phantom face, through the unchangeable 
crevice which is his prison window.

By slow but sure degrees, the terrors of that hateful corner swell 
until they beset him at all times; invade his rest, make his dreams 
hideous, and his nights dreadful.  At first, he took a strange 
dislike to it; feeling as though it gave birth in his brain to 
something of corresponding shape, which ought not to be there, and 
racked his head with pains.  Then he began to fear it, then to 
dream of it, and of men whispering its name and pointing to it.  
Then he could not bear to look at it, nor yet to turn his back upon 
it.  Now, it is every night the lurking-place of a ghost:  a 
shadow:- a silent something, horrible to see, but whether bird, or 
beast, or muffled human shape, he cannot tell.

When he is in his cell by day, he fears the little yard without.  
When he is in the yard, he dreads to re-enter the cell.  When night 
comes, there stands the phantom in the corner.  If he have the 
courage to stand in its place, and drive it out (he had once:  
being desperate), it broods upon his bed.  In the twilight, and 
always at the same hour, a voice calls to him by name; as the 
darkness thickens, his Loom begins to live; and even that, his 
comfort, is a hideous figure, watching him till daybreak.

Again, by slow degrees, these horrible fancies depart from him one 
by one:  returning sometimes, unexpectedly, but at longer 
intervals, and in less alarming shapes.  He has talked upon 
religious matters with the gentleman who visits him, and has read 
his Bible, and has written a prayer upon his slate, and hung it up 
as a kind of protection, and an assurance of Heavenly 
companionship.  He dreams now, sometimes, of his children or his 
wife, but is sure that they are dead, or have deserted him.  He is 
easily moved to tears; is gentle, submissive, and broken-spirited.  
Occasionally, the old agony comes back:  a very little thing will 
revive it; even a familiar sound, or the scent of summer flowers in 
the air; but it does not last long, now:  for the world without, 
has come to be the vision, and this solitary life, the sad reality.

If his term of imprisonment be short - I mean comparatively, for 
short it cannot be - the last half year is almost worse than all; 
for then he thinks the prison will take fire and he be burnt in the 
ruins, or that he is doomed to die within the walls, or that he 
will be detained on some false charge and sentenced for another 
term:  or that something, no matter what, must happen to prevent 
his going at large.  And this is natural, and impossible to be 
reasoned against, because, after his long separation from human 
life, and his great suffering, any event will appear to him more 
probable in the contemplation, than the being restored to liberty 
and his fellow-creatures.

If his period of confinement have been very long, the prospect of 
release bewilders and confuses him.  His broken heart may flutter 
for a moment, when he thinks of the world outside, and what it 
might have been to him in all those lonely years, but that is all.  
The cell-door has been closed too long on all its hopes and cares.  
Better to have hanged him in the beginning than bring him to this 
pass, and send him forth to mingle with his kind, who are his kind 
no more.

On the haggard face of every man among these prisoners, the same 
expression sat.  I know not what to liken it to.  It had something 
of that strained attention which we see upon the faces of the blind 
and deaf, mingled with a kind of horror, as though they had all 
been secretly terrified.  In every little chamber that I entered, 
and at every grate through which I looked, I seemed to see the same 
appalling countenance.  It lives in my memory, with the fascination 
of a remarkable picture.  Parade before my eyes, a hundred men, 
with one among them newly released from this solitary suffering, 
and I would point him out.

The faces of the women, as I have said, it humanises and refines.  
Whether this be because of their better nature, which is elicited 
in solitude, or because of their being gentler creatures, of 
greater patience and longer suffering, I do not know; but so it is.  
That the punishment is nevertheless, to my thinking, fully as cruel 
and as wrong in their case, as in that of the men, I need scarcely 
add.

My firm conviction is that, independent of the mental anguish it 
occasions - an anguish so acute and so tremendous, that all 
imagination of it must fall far short of the reality - it wears the 
mind into a morbid state, which renders it unfit for the rough 
contact and busy action of the world.  It is my fixed opinion that 
those who have undergone this punishment, MUST pass into society 
again morally unhealthy and diseased.  There are many instances on 
record, of men who have chosen, or have been condemned, to lives of 
perfect solitude, but I scarcely remember one, even among sages of 
strong and vigorous intellect, where its effect has not become 
apparent, in some disordered train of thought, or some gloomy 
hallucination.  What monstrous phantoms, bred of despondency and 
doubt, and born and reared in solitude, have stalked upon the 
earth, making creation ugly, and darkening the face of Heaven!

Suicides are rare among these prisoners:  are almost, indeed, 
unknown.  But no argument in favour of the system, can reasonably 
be deduced from this circumstance, although it is very often urged.  
All men who have made diseases of the mind their study, know 
perfectly well that such extreme depression and despair as will 
change the whole character, and beat down all its powers of 
elasticity and self-resistance, may be at work within a man, and 
yet stop short of self-destruction.  This is a common case.

That it makes the senses dull, and by degrees impairs the bodily 
faculties, I am quite sure.  I remarked to those who were with me 
in this very establishment at Philadelphia, that the criminals who 
had been there long, were deaf.  They, who were in the habit of 
seeing these men constantly, were perfectly amazed at the idea, 
which they regarded as groundless and fanciful.  And yet the very 
first prisoner to whom they appealed - one of their own selection 
confirmed my impression (which was unknown to him) instantly, and 
said, with a genuine air it was impossible to doubt, that he 
couldn't think how it happened, but he WAS growing very dull of 
hearing.

That it is a singularly unequal punishment, and affects the worst 
man least, there is no doubt.  In its superior efficiency as a 
means of reformation, compared with that other code of regulations 
which allows the prisoners to work in company without communicating 
together, I have not the smallest faith.  All the instances of 
reformation that were mentioned to me, were of a kind that might 
have been - and I have no doubt whatever, in my own mind, would 
have been - equally well brought about by the Silent System.  With 
regard to such men as the negro burglar and the English thief, even 
the most enthusiastic have scarcely any hope of their conversion.

It seems to me that the objection that nothing wholesome or good 
has ever had its growth in such unnatural solitude, and that even a 
dog or any of the more intelligent among beasts, would pine, and 
mope, and rust away, beneath its influence, would be in itself a 
sufficient argument against this system.  But when we recollect, in 
addition, how very cruel and severe it is, and that a solitary life 
is always liable to peculiar and distinct objections of a most 
deplorable nature, which have arisen here, and call to mind, 
moreover, that the choice is not between this system, and a bad or 
ill-considered one, but between it and another which has worked 
well, and is, in its whole design and practice, excellent; there is 
surely more than sufficient reason for abandoning a mode of 
punishment attended by so little hope or promise, and fraught, 
beyond dispute, with such a host of evils.

As a relief to its contemplation, I will close this chapter with a 
curious story arising out of the same theme, which was related to 
me, on the occasion of this visit, by some of the gentlemen 
concerned.

At one of the periodical meetings of the inspectors of this prison, 
a working man of Philadelphia presented himself before the Board, 
and earnestly requested to be placed in solitary confinement.  On 
being asked what motive could possibly prompt him to make this 
strange demand, he answered that he had an irresistible propensity 
to get drunk; that he was constantly indulging it, to his great 
misery and ruin; that he had no power of resistance; that he wished 
to be put beyond the reach of temptation; and that he could think 
of no better way than this.  It was pointed out to him, in reply, 
that the prison was for criminals who had been tried and sentenced 
by the law, and could not be made available for any such fanciful 
purposes; he was exhorted to abstain from intoxicating drinks, as 
he surely might if he would; and received other very good advice, 
with which he retired, exceedingly dissatisfied with the result of 
his application.

He came again, and again, and again, and was so very earnest and 
importunate, that at last they took counsel together, and said, 'He 
will certainly qualify himself for admission, if we reject him any 
more.  Let us shut him up.  He will soon be glad to go away, and 
then we shall get rid of him.'  So they made him sign a statement 
which would prevent his ever sustaining an action for false 
imprisonment, to the effect that his incarceration was voluntary, 
and of his own seeking; they requested him to take notice that the 
officer in attendance had orders to release him at any hour of the 
day or night, when he might knock upon his door for that purpose; 
but desired him to understand, that once going out, he would not be 
admitted any more.  These conditions agreed upon, and he still 
remaining in the same mind, he was conducted to the prison, and 
shut up in one of the cells.

In this cell, the man, who had not the firmness to leave a glass of 
liquor standing untasted on a table before him - in this cell, in 
solitary confinement, and working every day at his trade of 
shoemaking, this man remained nearly two years.  His health 
beginning to fail at the expiration of that time, the surgeon 
recommended that he should work occasionally in the garden; and as 
he liked the notion very much, he went about this new occupation 
with great cheerfulness.

He was digging here, one summer day, very industriously, when the 
wicket in the outer gate chanced to be left open:  showing, beyond, 
the well-remembered dusty road and sunburnt fields.  The way was as 
free to him as to any man living, but he no sooner raised his head 
and caught sight of it, all shining in the light, than, with the 
involuntary instinct of a prisoner, he cast away his spade, 
scampered off as fast as his legs would carry him, and never once 
looked back.



CHAPTER VIII - WASHINGTON.  THE LEGISLATURE.  AND THE PRESIDENT'S 
HOUSE



WE left Philadelphia by steamboat, at six o'clock one very cold 
morning, and turned our faces towards Washington.

In the course of this day's journey, as on subsequent occasions, we 
encountered some Englishmen (small farmers, perhaps, or country 
publicans at home) who were settled in America, and were travelling 
on their own affairs.  Of all grades and kinds of men that jostle 
one in the public conveyances of the States, these are often the 
most intolerable and the most insufferable companions.  United to 
every disagreeable characteristic that the worst kind of American 
travellers possess, these countrymen of ours display an amount of 
insolent conceit and cool assumption of superiority, quite 
monstrous to behold.  In the coarse familiarity of their approach, 
and the effrontery of their inquisitiveness (which they are in 
great haste to assert, as if they panted to revenge themselves upon 
the decent old restraints of home), they surpass any native 
specimens that came within my range of observation:  and I often 
grew so patriotic when I saw and heard them, that I would 
cheerfully have submitted to a reasonable fine, if I could have 
given any other country in the whole world, the honour of claiming 
them for its children.

As Washington may be called the head-quarters of tobacco-tinctured 
saliva, the time is come when I must confess, without any disguise, 
that the prevalence of those two odious practices of chewing and 
expectorating began about this time to be anything but agreeable, 
and soon became most offensive and sickening.  In all the public 
places of America, this filthy custom is recognised.  In the courts 
of law, the judge has his spittoon, the crier his, the witness his, 
and the prisoner his; while the jurymen and spectators are provided 
for, as so many men who in the course of nature must desire to spit 
incessantly.  In the hospitals, the students of medicine are 
requested, by notices upon the wall, to eject their tobacco juice 
into the boxes provided for that purpose, and not to discolour the 
stairs.  In public buildings, visitors are implored, through the 
same agency, to squirt the essence of their quids, or 'plugs,' as I 
have heard them called by gentlemen learned in this kind of 
sweetmeat, into the national spittoons, and not about the bases of 
the marble columns.  But in some parts, this custom is inseparably 
mixed up with every meal and morning call, and with all the 
transactions of social life.  The stranger, who follows in the 
track I took myself, will find it in its full bloom and glory, 
luxuriant in all its alarming recklessness, at Washington.  And let 
him not persuade himself (as I once did, to my shame) that previous 
tourists have exaggerated its extent.  The thing itself is an 
exaggeration of nastiness, which cannot be outdone.

On board this steamboat, there were two young gentlemen, with 
shirt-collars reversed as usual, and armed with very big walking-
sticks; who planted two seats in the middle of the deck, at a 
distance of some four paces apart; took out their tobacco-boxes; 
and sat down opposite each other, to chew.  In less than a quarter 
of an hour's time, these hopeful youths had shed about them on the 
clean boards, a copious shower of yellow rain; clearing, by that 
means, a kind of magic circle, within whose limits no intruders 
dared to come, and which they never failed to refresh and re-
refresh before a spot was dry.  This being before breakfast, rather 
disposed me, I confess, to nausea; but looking attentively at one 
of the expectorators, I plainly saw that he was young in chewing, 
and felt inwardly uneasy, himself.  A glow of delight came over me 
at this discovery; and as I marked his face turn paler and paler, 
and saw the ball of tobacco in his left cheek, quiver with his 
suppressed agony, while yet he spat, and chewed, and spat again, in 
emulation of his older friend, I could have fallen on his neck and 
implored him to go on for hours.

We all sat down to a comfortable breakfast in the cabin below, 
where there was no more hurry or confusion than at such a meal in 
England, and where there was certainly greater politeness exhibited 
than at most of our stage-coach banquets.  At about nine o'clock we 
arrived at the railroad station, and went on by the cars.  At noon 
we turned out again, to cross a wide river in another steamboat; 
landed at a continuation of the railroad on the opposite shore; and 
went on by other cars; in which, in the course of the next hour or 
so, we crossed by wooden bridges, each a mile in length, two 
creeks, called respectively Great and Little Gunpowder.  The water 
in both was blackened with flights of canvas-backed ducks, which 
are most delicious eating, and abound hereabouts at that season of 
the year.

These bridges are of wood, have no parapet, and are only just wide 
enough for the passage of the trains; which, in the event of the 
smallest accident, wound inevitably be plunged into the river.  
They are startling contrivances, and are most agreeable when 
passed.

We stopped to dine at Baltimore, and being now in Maryland, were 
waited on, for the first time, by slaves.  The sensation of 
exacting any service from human creatures who are bought and sold, 
and being, for the time, a party as it were to their condition, is 
not an enviable one.  The institution exists, perhaps, in its least 
repulsive and most mitigated form in such a town as this; but it IS 
slavery; and though I was, with respect to it, an innocent man, its 
presence filled me with a sense of shame and self-reproach.

After dinner, we went down to the railroad again, and took our 
seats in the cars for Washington.  Being rather early, those men 
and boys who happened to have nothing particular to do, and were 
curious in foreigners, came (according to custom) round the 
carriage in which I sat; let down all the windows; thrust in their 
heads and shoulders; hooked themselves on conveniently, by their 
elbows; and fell to comparing notes on the subject of my personal 
appearance, with as much indifference as if I were a stuffed 
figure.  I never gained so much uncompromising information with 
reference to my own nose and eyes, and various impressions wrought 
by my mouth and chin on different minds, and how my head looks when 
it is viewed from behind, as on these occasions.  Some gentlemen 
were only satisfied by exercising their sense of touch; and the 
boys (who are surprisingly precocious in America) were seldom 
satisfied, even by that, but would return to the charge over and 
over again.  Many a budding president has walked into my room with 
his cap on his head and his hands in his pockets, and stared at me 
for two whole hours:  occasionally refreshing himself with a tweak 
of his nose, or a draught from the water-jug; or by walking to the 
windows and inviting other boys in the street below, to come up and 
do likewise:  crying, 'Here he is!'  'Come on!'  'Bring all your 
brothers!' with other hospitable entreaties of that nature.

We reached Washington at about half-past six that evening, and had 
upon the way a beautiful view of the Capitol, which is a fine 
building of the Corinthian order, placed upon a noble and 
commanding eminence.  Arrived at the hotel; I saw no more of the 
place that night; being very tired, and glad to get to bed.

Breakfast over next morning, I walk about the streets for an hour 
or two, and, coming home, throw up the window in the front and 
back, and look out.  Here is Washington, fresh in my mind and under 
my eye.

Take the worst parts of the City Road and Pentonville, or the 
straggling outskirts of Paris, where the houses are smallest, 
preserving all their oddities, but especially the small shops and 
dwellings, occupied in Pentonville (but not in Washington) by 
furniture-brokers, keepers of poor eating-houses, and fanciers of 
birds.  Burn the whole down; build it up again in wood and plaster; 
widen it a little; throw in part of St. John's Wood; put green 
blinds outside all the private houses, with a red curtain and a 
white one in every window; plough up all the roads; plant a great 
deal of coarse turf in every place where it ought NOT to be; erect 
three handsome buildings in stone and marble, anywhere, but the 
more entirely out of everybody's way the better; call one the Post 
Office; one the Patent Office, and one the Treasury; make it 
scorching hot in the morning, and freezing cold in the afternoon, 
with an occasional tornado of wind and dust; leave a brick-field 
without the bricks, in all central places where a street may 
naturally be expected:  and that's Washington.

The hotel in which we live, is a long row of small houses fronting 
on the street, and opening at the back upon a common yard, in which 
hangs a great triangle.  Whenever a servant is wanted, somebody 
beats on this triangle from one stroke up to seven, according to 
the number of the house in which his presence is required; and as 
all the servants are always being wanted, and none of them ever 
come, this enlivening engine is in full performance the whole day 
through.  Clothes are drying in the same yard; female slaves, with 
cotton handkerchiefs twisted round their heads are running to and 
fro on the hotel business; black waiters cross and recross with 
dishes in their hands; two great dogs are playing upon a mound of 
loose bricks in the centre of the little square; a pig is turning 
up his stomach to the sun, and grunting 'that's comfortable!'; and 
neither the men, nor the women, nor the dogs, nor the pig, nor any 
created creature, takes the smallest notice of the triangle, which 
is tingling madly all the time.

I walk to the front window, and look across the road upon a long, 
straggling row of houses, one story high, terminating, nearly 
opposite, but a little to the left, in a melancholy piece of waste 
ground with frowzy grass, which looks like a small piece of country 
that has taken to drinking, and has quite lost itself.  Standing 
anyhow and all wrong, upon this open space, like something meteoric 
that has fallen down from the moon, is an odd, lop-sided, one-eyed 
kind of wooden building, that looks like a church, with a flag-
staff as long as itself sticking out of a steeple something larger 
than a tea-chest.  Under the window is a small stand of coaches, 
whose slave-drivers are sunning themselves on the steps of our 
door, and talking idly together.  The three most obtrusive houses 
near at hand are the three meanest.  On one - a shop, which never 
has anything in the window, and never has the door open - is 
painted in large characters, 'THE CITY LUNCH.'  At another, which 
looks like a backway to somewhere else, but is an independent 
building in itself, oysters are procurable in every style.  At the 
third, which is a very, very little tailor's shop, pants are fixed 
to order; or in other words, pantaloons are made to measure.  And 
that is our street in Washington.

It is sometimes called the City of Magnificent Distances, but it 
might with greater propriety be termed the City of Magnificent 
Intentions; for it is only on taking a bird's-eye view of it from 
the top of the Capitol, that one can at all comprehend the vast 
designs of its projector, an aspiring Frenchman.  Spacious avenues, 
that begin in nothing, and lead nowhere; streets, mile-long, that 
only want houses, roads and inhabitants; public buildings that need 
but a public to be complete; and ornaments of great thoroughfares, 
which only lack great thoroughfares to ornament - are its leading 
features.  One might fancy the season over, and most of the houses 
gone out of town for ever with their masters.  To the admirers of 
cities it is a Barmecide Feast:  a pleasant field for the 
imagination to rove in; a monument raised to a deceased project, 
with not even a legible inscription to record its departed 
greatness.

Such as it is, it is likely to remain.  It was originally chosen 
for the seat of Government, as a means of averting the conflicting 
jealousies and interests of the different States; and very 
probably, too, as being remote from mobs:  a consideration not to 
be slighted, even in America.  It has no trade or commerce of its 
own:  having little or no population beyond the President and his 
establishment; the members of the legislature who reside there 
during the session; the Government clerks and officers employed in 
the various departments; the keepers of the hotels and boarding-
houses; and the tradesmen who supply their tables.  It is very 
unhealthy.  Few people would live in Washington, I take it, who 
were not obliged to reside there; and the tides of emigration and 
speculation, those rapid and regardless currents, are little likely 
to flow at any time towards such dull and sluggish water.

The principal features of the Capitol, are, of course, the two 
houses of Assembly.  But there is, besides, in the centre of the 
building, a fine rotunda, ninety-six feet in diameter, and ninety-
six high, whose circular wall is divided into compartments, 
ornamented by historical pictures.  Four of these have for their 
subjects prominent events in the revolutionary struggle.  They were 
painted by Colonel Trumbull, himself a member of Washington's staff 
at the time of their occurrence; from which circumstance they 
derive a peculiar interest of their own.  In this same hall Mr. 
Greenough's large statue of Washington has been lately placed.  It 
has great merits of course, but it struck me as being rather 
strained and violent for its subject.  I could wish, however, to 
have seen it in a better light than it can ever be viewed in, where 
it stands.

There is a very pleasant and commodious library in the Capitol; and 
from a balcony in front, the bird's-eye view, of which I have just 
spoken, may be had, together with a beautiful prospect of the 
adjacent country.  In one of the ornamented portions of the 
building, there is a figure of Justice; whereunto the Guide Book 
says, 'the artist at first contemplated giving more of nudity, but 
he was warned that the public sentiment in this country would not 
admit of it, and in his caution he has gone, perhaps, into the 
opposite extreme.'  Poor Justice! she has been made to wear much 
stranger garments in America than those she pines in, in the 
Capitol.  Let us hope that she has changed her dress-maker since 
they were fashioned, and that the public sentiment of the country 
did not cut out the clothes she hides her lovely figure in, just 
now.

The House of Representatives is a beautiful and spacious hall, of 
semicircular shape, supported by handsome pillars.  One part of the 
gallery is appropriated to the ladies, and there they sit in front 
rows, and come in, and go out, as at a play or concert.  The chair 
is canopied, and raised considerably above the floor of the House; 
and every member has an easy chair and a writing desk to himself:  
which is denounced by some people out of doors as a most 
unfortunate and injudicious arrangement, tending to long sittings 
and prosaic speeches.  It is an elegant chamber to look at, but a 
singularly bad one for all purposes of hearing.  The Senate, which 
is smaller, is free from this objection, and is exceedingly well 
adapted to the uses for which it is designed.  The sittings, I need 
hardly add, take place in the day; and the parliamentary forms are 
modelled on those of the old country.

I was sometimes asked, in my progress through other places, whether 
I had not been very much impressed by the HEADS of the lawmakers at 
Washington; meaning not their chiefs and leaders, but literally 
their individual and personal heads, whereon their hair grew, and 
whereby the phrenological character of each legislator was 
expressed:  and I almost as often struck my questioner dumb with 
indignant consternation by answering 'No, that I didn't remember 
being at all overcome.'  As I must, at whatever hazard, repeat the 
avowal here, I will follow it up by relating my impressions on this 
subject in as few words as possible.

In the first place - it may be from some imperfect development of 
my organ of veneration - I do not remember having ever fainted 
away, or having even been moved to tears of joyful pride, at sight 
of any legislative body.  I have borne the House of Commons like a 
man, and have yielded to no weakness, but slumber, in the House of 
Lords.  I have seen elections for borough and county, and have 
never been impelled (no matter which party won) to damage my hat by 
throwing it up into the air in triumph, or to crack my voice by 
shouting forth any reference to our Glorious Constitution, to the 
noble purity of our independent voters, or, the unimpeachable 
integrity of our independent members.  Having withstood such strong 
attacks upon my fortitude, it is possible that I may be of a cold 
and insensible temperament, amounting to iciness, in such matters; 
and therefore my impressions of the live pillars of the Capitol at 
Washington must be received with such grains of allowance as this 
free confession may seem to demand.

Did I see in this public body an assemblage of men, bound together 
in the sacred names of Liberty and Freedom, and so asserting the 
chaste dignity of those twin goddesses, in all their discussions, 
as to exalt at once the Eternal Principles to which their names are 
given, and their own character and the character of their 
countrymen, in the admiring eyes of the whole world?

It was but a week, since an aged, grey-haired man, a lasting honour 
to the land that gave him birth, who has done good service to his 
country, as his forefathers did, and who will be remembered scores 
upon scores of years after the worms bred in its corruption, are 
but so many grains of dust - it was but a week, since this old man 
had stood for days upon his trial before this very body, charged 
with having dared to assert the infamy of that traffic, which has 
for its accursed merchandise men and women, and their unborn 
children.  Yes.  And publicly exhibited in the same city all the 
while; gilded, framed and glazed hung up for general admiration; 
shown to strangers not with shame, but pride; its face not turned 
towards the wall, itself not taken down and burned; is the 
Unanimous Declaration of the Thirteen United States of America, 
which solemnly declares that All Men are created Equal; and are 
endowed by their Creator with the Inalienable Rights of Life, 
Liberty, and the Pursuit of Happiness!

It was not a month, since this same body had sat calmly by, and 
heard a man, one of themselves, with oaths which beggars in their 
drink reject, threaten to cut another's throat from ear to ear.  
There he sat, among them; not crushed by the general feeling of the 
assembly, but as good a man as any.

There was but a week to come, and another of that body, for doing 
his duty to those who sent him there; for claiming in a Republic 
the Liberty and Freedom of expressing their sentiments, and making 
known their prayer; would be tried, found guilty, and have strong 
censure passed upon him by the rest.  His was a grave offence 
indeed; for years before, he had risen up and said, 'A gang of male 
and female slaves for sale, warranted to breed like cattle, linked 
to each other by iron fetters, are passing now along the open 
street beneath the windows of your Temple of Equality!  Look!'  But 
there are many kinds of hunters engaged in the Pursuit of 
Happiness, and they go variously armed.  It is the Inalienable 
Right of some among them, to take the field after THEIR Happiness 
equipped with cat and cartwhip, stocks, and iron collar, and to 
shout their view halloa! (always in praise of Liberty) to the music 
of clanking chains and bloody stripes.

Where sat the many legislators of coarse threats; of words and 
blows such as coalheavers deal upon each other, when they forget 
their breeding?  On every side.  Every session had its anecdotes of 
that kind, and the actors were all there.

Did I recognise in this assembly, a body of men, who, applying 
themselves in a new world to correct some of the falsehoods and 
vices of the old, purified the avenues to Public Life, paved the 
dirty ways to Place and Power, debated and made laws for the Common 
Good, and had no party but their Country?

I saw in them, the wheels that move the meanest perversion of 
virtuous Political Machinery that the worst tools ever wrought.  
Despicable trickery at elections; under-handed tamperings with 
public officers; cowardly attacks upon opponents, with scurrilous 
newspapers for shields, and hired pens for daggers; shameful 
trucklings to mercenary knaves, whose claim to be considered, is, 
that every day and week they sow new crops of ruin with their venal 
types, which are the dragon's teeth of yore, in everything but 
sharpness; aidings and abettings of every bad inclination in the 
popular mind, and artful suppressions of all its good influences:  
such things as these, and in a word, Dishonest Faction in its most 
depraved and most unblushing form, stared out from every corner of 
the crowded hall.

Did I see among them, the intelligence and refinement:  the true, 
honest, patriotic heart of America?  Here and there, were drops of 
its blood and life, but they scarcely coloured the stream of 
desperate adventurers which sets that way for profit and for pay.  
It is the game of these men, and of their profligate organs, to 
make the strife of politics so fierce and brutal, and so 
destructive of all self-respect in worthy men, that sensitive and 
delicate-minded persons shall be kept aloof, and they, and such as 
they, be left to battle out their selfish views unchecked.  And 
thus this lowest of all scrambling fights goes on, and they who in 
other countries would, from their intelligence and station, most 
aspire to make the laws, do here recoil the farthest from that 
degradation.

That there are, among the representatives of the people in both 
Houses, and among all parties, some men of high character and great 
abilities, I need not say.  The foremost among those politicians 
who are known in Europe, have been already described, and I see no 
reason to depart from the rule I have laid down for my guidance, of 
abstaining from all mention of individuals.  It will be sufficient 
to add, that to the most favourable accounts that have been written 
of them, I more than fully and most heartily subscribe; and that 
personal intercourse and free communication have bred within me, 
not the result predicted in the very doubtful proverb, but 
increased admiration and respect.  They are striking men to look 
at, hard to deceive, prompt to act, lions in energy, Crichtons in 
varied accomplishments, Indians in fire of eye and gesture, 
Americans in strong and generous impulse; and they as well 
represent the honour and wisdom of their country at home, as the 
distinguished gentleman who is now its Minister at the British 
Court sustains its highest character abroad.

I visited both houses nearly every day, during my stay in 
Washington.  On my initiatory visit to the House of 
Representatives, they divided against a decision of the chair; but 
the chair won.  The second time I went, the member who was 
speaking, being interrupted by a laugh, mimicked it, as one child 
would in quarrelling with another, and added, 'that he would make 
honourable gentlemen opposite, sing out a little more on the other 
side of their mouths presently.'  But interruptions are rare; the 
speaker being usually heard in silence.  There are more quarrels 
than with us, and more threatenings than gentlemen are accustomed 
to exchange in any civilised society of which we have record:  but 
farm-yard imitations have not as yet been imported from the 
Parliament of the United Kingdom.  The feature in oratory which 
appears to be the most practised, and most relished, is the 
constant repetition of the same idea or shadow of an idea in fresh 
words; and the inquiry out of doors is not, 'What did he say?' but, 
'How long did he speak?'  These, however, are but enlargements of a 
principle which prevails elsewhere.

The Senate is a dignified and decorous body, and its proceedings 
are conducted with much gravity and order.  Both houses are 
handsomely carpeted; but the state to which these carpets are 
reduced by the universal disregard of the spittoon with which every 
honourable member is accommodated, and the extraordinary 
improvements on the pattern which are squirted and dabbled upon it 
in every direction, do not admit of being described.  I will merely 
observe, that I strongly recommend all strangers not to look at the 
floor; and if they happen to drop anything, though it be their 
purse, not to pick it up with an ungloved hand on any account.

It is somewhat remarkable too, at first, to say the least, to see 
so many honourable members with swelled faces; and it is scarcely 
less remarkable to discover that this appearance is caused by the 
quantity of tobacco they contrive to stow within the hollow of the 
cheek.  It is strange enough too, to see an honourable gentleman 
leaning back in his tilted chair with his legs on the desk before 
him, shaping a convenient 'plug' with his penknife, and when it is 
quite ready for use, shooting the old one from his mouth, as from a 
pop-gun, and clapping the new one in its place.

I was surprised to observe that even steady old chewers of great 
experience, are not always good marksmen, which has rather inclined 
me to doubt that general proficiency with the rifle, of which we 
have heard so much in England.  Several gentlemen called upon me 
who, in the course of conversation, frequently missed the spittoon 
at five paces; and one (but he was certainly short-sighted) mistook 
the closed sash for the open window, at three.  On another 
occasion, when I dined out, and was sitting with two ladies and 
some gentlemen round a fire before dinner, one of the company fell 
short of the fireplace, six distinct times.  I am disposed to 
think, however, that this was occasioned by his not aiming at that 
object; as there was a white marble hearth before the fender, which 
was more convenient, and may have suited his purpose better.

The Patent Office at Washington, furnishes an extraordinary example 
of American enterprise and ingenuity; for the immense number of 
models it contains are the accumulated inventions of only five 
years; the whole of the previous collection having been destroyed 
by fire.  The elegant structure in which they are arranged is one 
of design rather than execution, for there is but one side erected 
out of four, though the works are stopped.  The Post Office is a 
very compact and very beautiful building.  In one of the 
departments, among a collection of rare and curious articles, are 
deposited the presents which have been made from time to time to 
the American ambassadors at foreign courts by the various 
potentates to whom they were the accredited agents of the Republic; 
gifts which by the law they are not permitted to retain.  I confess 
that I looked upon this as a very painful exhibition, and one by no 
means flattering to the national standard of honesty and honour.  
That can scarcely be a high state of moral feeling which imagines a 
gentleman of repute and station, likely to be corrupted, in the 
discharge of his duty, by the present of a snuff-box, or a richly-
mounted sword, or an Eastern shawl; and surely the Nation who 
reposes confidence in her appointed servants, is likely to be 
better served, than she who makes them the subject of such very 
mean and paltry suspicions.

At George Town, in the suburbs, there is a Jesuit College; 
delightfully situated, and, so far as I had an opportunity of 
seeing, well managed.  Many persons who are not members of the 
Romish Church, avail themselves, I believe, of these institutions, 
and of the advantageous opportunities they afford for the education 
of their children.  The heights of this neighbourhood, above the 
Potomac River, are very picturesque:  and are free, I should 
conceive, from some of the insalubrities of Washington.  The air, 
at that elevation, was quite cool and refreshing, when in the city 
it was burning hot.

The President's mansion is more like an English club-house, both 
within and without, than any other kind of establishment with which 
I can compare it.  The ornamental ground about it has been laid out 
in garden walks; they are pretty, and agreeable to the eye; though 
they have that uncomfortable air of having been made yesterday, 
which is far from favourable to the display of such beauties.

My first visit to this house was on the morning after my arrival, 
when I was carried thither by an official gentleman, who was so 
kind as to charge himself with my presentation to the President.

We entered a large hall, and having twice or thrice rung a bell 
which nobody answered, walked without further ceremony through the 
rooms on the ground floor, as divers other gentlemen (mostly with 
their hats on, and their hands in their pockets) were doing very 
leisurely.  Some of these had ladies with them, to whom they were 
showing the premises; others were lounging on the chairs and sofas; 
others, in a perfect state of exhaustion from listlessness, were 
yawning drearily.  The greater portion of this assemblage were 
rather asserting their supremacy than doing anything else, as they 
had no particular business there, that anybody knew of.  A few were 
closely eyeing the movables, as if to make quite sure that the 
President (who was far from popular) had not made away with any of 
the furniture, or sold the fixtures for his private benefit.

After glancing at these loungers; who were scattered over a pretty 
drawing-room, opening upon a terrace which commanded a beautiful 
prospect of the river and the adjacent country; and who were 
sauntering, too, about a larger state-room called the Eastern 
Drawing-room; we went up-stairs into another chamber, where were 
certain visitors, waiting for audiences.  At sight of my conductor, 
a black in plain clothes and yellow slippers who was gliding 
noiselessly about, and whispering messages in the ears of the more 
impatient, made a sign of recognition, and glided off to announce 
him.

We had previously looked into another chamber fitted all round with 
a great, bare, wooden desk or counter, whereon lay files of 
newspapers, to which sundry gentlemen were referring.  But there 
were no such means of beguiling the time in this apartment, which 
was as unpromising and tiresome as any waiting-room in one of our 
public establishments, or any physician's dining-room during his 
hours of consultation at home.

There were some fifteen or twenty persons in the room.  One, a 
tall, wiry, muscular old man, from the west; sunburnt and swarthy; 
with a brown white hat on his knees, and a giant umbrella resting 
between his legs; who sat bolt upright in his chair, frowning 
steadily at the carpet, and twitching the hard lines about his 
mouth, as if he had made up his mind 'to fix' the President on what 
he had to say, and wouldn't bate him a grain.  Another, a Kentucky 
farmer, six-feet-six in height, with his hat on, and his hands 
under his coat-tails, who leaned against the wall and kicked the 
floor with his heel, as though he had Time's head under his shoe, 
and were literally 'killing' him.  A third, an oval-faced, bilious-
looking man, with sleek black hair cropped close, and whiskers and 
beard shaved down to blue dots, who sucked the head of a thick 
stick, and from time to time took it out of his mouth, to see how 
it was getting on.  A fourth did nothing but whistle.  A fifth did 
nothing but spit.  And indeed all these gentlemen were so very 
persevering and energetic in this latter particular, and bestowed 
their favours so abundantly upon the carpet, that I take it for 
granted the Presidential housemaids have high wages, or, to speak 
more genteelly, an ample amount of 'compensation:' which is the 
American word for salary, in the case of all public servants.

We had not waited in this room many minutes, before the black 
messenger returned, and conducted us into another of smaller 
dimensions, where, at a business-like table covered with papers, 
sat the President himself.  He looked somewhat worn and anxious, 
and well he might; being at war with everybody - but the expression 
of his face was mild and pleasant, and his manner was remarkably 
unaffected, gentlemanly, and agreeable.  I thought that in his 
whole carriage and demeanour, he became his station singularly 
well.

Being advised that the sensible etiquette of the republican court 
admitted of a traveller, like myself, declining, without any 
impropriety, an invitation to dinner, which did not reach me until 
I had concluded my arrangements for leaving Washington some days 
before that to which it referred, I only returned to this house 
once.  It was on the occasion of one of those general assemblies 
which are held on certain nights, between the hours of nine and 
twelve o'clock, and are called, rather oddly, Levees.

I went, with my wife, at about ten.  There was a pretty dense crowd 
of carriages and people in the court-yard, and so far as I could 
make out, there were no very clear regulations for the taking up or 
setting down of company.  There were certainly no policemen to 
soothe startled horses, either by sawing at their bridles or 
flourishing truncheons in their eyes; and I am ready to make oath 
that no inoffensive persons were knocked violently on the head, or 
poked acutely in their backs or stomachs; or brought to a 
standstill by any such gentle means, and then taken into custody 
for not moving on.  But there was no confusion or disorder.  Our 
carriage reached the porch in its turn, without any blustering, 
swearing, shouting, backing, or other disturbance:  and we 
dismounted with as much ease and comfort as though we had been 
escorted by the whole Metropolitan Force from A to Z inclusive.

The suite of rooms on the ground-floor were lighted up, and a 
military band was playing in the hall.  In the smaller drawing-
room, the centre of a circle of company, were the President and his 
daughter-in-law, who acted as the lady of the mansion; and a very 
interesting, graceful, and accomplished lady too.  One gentleman 
who stood among this group, appeared to take upon himself the 
functions of a master of the ceremonies.  I saw no other officers 
or attendants, and none were needed.

The great drawing-room, which I have already mentioned, and the 
other chambers on the ground-floor, were crowded to excess.  The 
company was not, in our sense of the term, select, for it 
comprehended persons of very many grades and classes; nor was there 
any great display of costly attire:  indeed, some of the costumes 
may have been, for aught I know, grotesque enough.  But the decorum 
and propriety of behaviour which prevailed, were unbroken by any 
rude or disagreeable incident; and every man, even among the 
miscellaneous crowd in the hall who were admitted without any 
orders or tickets to look on, appeared to feel that he was a part 
of the Institution, and was responsible for its preserving a 
becoming character, and appearing to the best advantage.

That these visitors, too, whatever their station, were not without 
some refinement of taste and appreciation of intellectual gifts, 
and gratitude to those men who, by the peaceful exercise of great 
abilities, shed new charms and associations upon the homes of their 
countrymen, and elevate their character in other lands, was most 
earnestly testified by their reception of Washington Irving, my 
dear friend, who had recently been appointed Minister at the court 
of Spain, and who was among them that night, in his new character, 
for the first and last time before going abroad.  I sincerely 
believe that in all the madness of American politics, few public 
men would have been so earnestly, devotedly, and affectionately 
caressed, as this most charming writer:  and I have seldom 
respected a public assembly more, than I did this eager throng, 
when I saw them turning with one mind from noisy orators and 
officers of state, and flocking with a generous and honest impulse 
round the man of quiet pursuits:  proud in his promotion as 
reflecting back upon their country:  and grateful to him with their 
whole hearts for the store of graceful fancies he had poured out 
among them.  Long may he dispense such treasures with unsparing 
hand; and long may they remember him as worthily!

* * * * * *

The term we had assigned for the duration of our stay in Washington 
was now at an end, and we were to begin to travel; for the railroad 
distances we had traversed yet, in journeying among these older 
towns, are on that great continent looked upon as nothing.

I had at first intended going South - to Charleston.  But when I 
came to consider the length of time which this journey would 
occupy, and the premature heat of the season, which even at 
Washington had been often very trying; and weighed moreover, in my 
own mind, the pain of living in the constant contemplation of 
slavery, against the more than doubtful chances of my ever seeing 
it, in the time I had to spare, stripped of the disguises in which 
it would certainly be dressed, and so adding any item to the host 
of facts already heaped together on the subject; I began to listen 
to old whisperings which had often been present to me at home in 
England, when I little thought of ever being here; and to dream 
again of cities growing up, like palaces in fairy tales, among the 
wilds and forests of the west.

The advice I received in most quarters when I began to yield to my 
desire of travelling towards that point of the compass was, 
according to custom, sufficiently cheerless:  my companion being 
threatened with more perils, dangers, and discomforts, than I can 
remember or would catalogue if I could; but of which it will be 
sufficient to remark that blowings-up in steamboats and breakings-
down in coaches were among the least.  But, having a western route 
sketched out for me by the best and kindest authority to which I 
could have resorted, and putting no great faith in these 
discouragements, I soon determined on my plan of action.

This was to travel south, only to Richmond in Virginia; and then to 
turn, and shape our course for the Far West; whither I beseech the 
reader's company, in a new chapter.



CHAPTER IX - A NIGHT STEAMER ON THE POTOMAC RIVER.  VIRGINIA ROAD, 
AND A BLACK DRIVER.  RICHMOND.  BALTIMORE.  THE HARRISBURG MAIL, 
AND A GLIMPSE OF THE CITY.  A CANAL BOAT



WE were to proceed in the first instance by steamboat; and as it is 
usual to sleep on board, in consequence of the starting-hour being 
four o'clock in the morning, we went down to where she lay, at that 
very uncomfortable time for such expeditions when slippers are most 
valuable, and a familiar bed, in the perspective of an hour or two, 
looks uncommonly pleasant.

It is ten o'clock at night:  say half-past ten:  moonlight, warm, 
and dull enough.  The steamer (not unlike a child's Noah's ark in 
form, with the machinery on the top of the roof) is riding lazily 
up and down, and bumping clumsily against the wooden pier, as the 
ripple of the river trifles with its unwieldy carcase.  The wharf 
is some distance from the city.  There is nobody down here; and one 
or two dull lamps upon the steamer's decks are the only signs of 
life remaining, when our coach has driven away.  As soon as our 
footsteps are heard upon the planks, a fat negress, particularly 
favoured by nature in respect of bustle, emerges from some dark 
stairs, and marshals my wife towards the ladies' cabin, to which 
retreat she goes, followed by a mighty bale of cloaks and great-
coats.  I valiantly resolve not to go to bed at all, but to walk up 
and down the pier till morning.

I begin my promenade - thinking of all kinds of distant things and 
persons, and of nothing near - and pace up and down for half-an-
hour.  Then I go on board again; and getting into the light of one 
of the lamps, look at my watch and think it must have stopped; and 
wonder what has become of the faithful secretary whom I brought 
along with me from Boston.  He is supping with our late landlord (a 
Field Marshal, at least, no doubt) in honour of our departure, and 
may be two hours longer.  I walk again, but it gets duller and 
duller:  the moon goes down:  next June seems farther off in the 
dark, and the echoes of my footsteps make me nervous.  It has 
turned cold too; and walking up and down without my companion in 
such lonely circumstances, is but poor amusement.  So I break my 
staunch resolution, and think it may be, perhaps, as well to go to 
bed.

I go on board again; open the door of the gentlemen's cabin and 
walk in.  Somehow or other - from its being so quiet, I suppose - I 
have taken it into my head that there is nobody there.  To my 
horror and amazement it is full of sleepers in every stage, shape, 
attitude, and variety of slumber:  in the berths, on the chairs, on 
the floors, on the tables, and particularly round the stove, my 
detested enemy.  I take another step forward, and slip on the 
shining face of a black steward, who lies rolled in a blanket on 
the floor.  He jumps up, grins, half in pain and half in 
hospitality; whispers my own name in my ear; and groping among the 
sleepers, leads me to my berth.  Standing beside it, I count these 
slumbering passengers, and get past forty.  There is no use in 
going further, so I begin to undress.  As the chairs are all 
occupied, and there is nothing else to put my clothes on, I deposit 
them upon the ground:  not without soiling my hands, for it is in 
the same condition as the carpets in the Capitol, and from the same 
cause.  Having but partially undressed, I clamber on my shelf, and 
hold the curtain open for a few minutes while I look round on all 
my fellow-travellers again.  That done, I let it fall on them, and 
on the world:  turn round:  and go to sleep.

I wake, of course, when we get under weigh, for there is a good 
deal of noise.  The day is then just breaking.  Everybody wakes at 
the same time.  Some are self-possessed directly, and some are much 
perplexed to make out where they are until they have rubbed their 
eyes, and leaning on one elbow, looked about them.  Some yawn, some 
groan, nearly all spit, and a few get up.  I am among the risers:  
for it is easy to feel, without going into the fresh air, that the 
atmosphere of the cabin is vile in the last degree.  I huddle on my 
clothes, go down into the fore-cabin, get shaved by the barber, and 
wash myself.  The washing and dressing apparatus for the passengers 
generally, consists of two jack-towels, three small wooden basins, 
a keg of water and a ladle to serve it out with, six square inches 
of looking-glass, two ditto ditto of yellow soap, a comb and brush 
for the head, and nothing for the teeth.  Everybody uses the comb 
and brush, except myself.  Everybody stares to see me using my own; 
and two or three gentlemen are strongly disposed to banter me on my 
prejudices, but don't.  When I have made my toilet, I go upon the 
hurricane-deck, and set in for two hours of hard walking up and 
down.  The sun is rising brilliantly; we are passing Mount Vernon, 
where Washington lies buried; the river is wide and rapid; and its 
banks are beautiful.  All the glory and splendour of the day are 
coming on, and growing brighter every minute.

At eight o'clock, we breakfast in the cabin where I passed the 
night, but the windows and doors are all thrown open, and now it is 
fresh enough.  There is no hurry or greediness apparent in the 
despatch of the meal.  It is longer than a travelling breakfast 
with us; more orderly, and more polite.

Soon after nine o'clock we come to Potomac Creek, where we are to 
land; and then comes the oddest part of the journey.  Seven stage-
coaches are preparing to carry us on.  Some of them are ready, some 
of them are not ready.  Some of the drivers are blacks, some 
whites.  There are four horses to each coach, and all the horses, 
harnessed or unharnessed, are there.  The passengers are getting 
out of the steamboat, and into the coaches; the luggage is being 
transferred in noisy wheelbarrows; the horses are frightened, and 
impatient to start; the black drivers are chattering to them like 
so many monkeys; and the white ones whooping like so many drovers:  
for the main thing to be done in all kinds of hostlering here, is 
to make as much noise as possible.  The coaches are something like 
the French coaches, but not nearly so good.  In lieu of springs, 
they are hung on bands of the strongest leather.  There is very 
little choice or difference between them; and they may be likened 
to the car portion of the swings at an English fair, roofed, put 
upon axle-trees and wheels, and curtained with painted canvas.  
They are covered with mud from the roof to the wheel-tire, and have 
never been cleaned since they were first built.

The tickets we have received on board the steamboat are marked No. 
1, so we belong to coach No. 1.  I throw my coat on the box, and 
hoist my wife and her maid into the inside.  It has only one step, 
and that being about a yard from the ground, is usually approached 
by a chair:  when there is no chair, ladies trust in Providence.  
The coach holds nine inside, having a seat across from door to 
door, where we in England put our legs:  so that there is only one 
feat more difficult in the performance than getting in, and that 
is, getting out again.  There is only one outside passenger, and he 
sits upon the box.  As I am that one, I climb up; and while they 
are strapping the luggage on the roof, and heaping it into a kind 
of tray behind, have a good opportunity of looking at the driver.

He is a negro - very black indeed.  He is dressed in a coarse 
pepper-and-salt suit excessively patched and darned (particularly 
at the knees), grey stockings, enormous unblacked high-low shoes, 
and very short trousers.  He has two odd gloves:  one of parti-
coloured worsted, and one of leather.  He has a very short whip, 
broken in the middle and bandaged up with string.  And yet he wears 
a low-crowned, broad-brimmed, black hat:  faintly shadowing forth a 
kind of insane imitation of an English coachman!  But somebody in 
authority cries 'Go ahead!' as I am making these observations.  The 
mail takes the lead in a four-horse waggon, and all the coaches 
follow in procession:  headed by No. 1.

By the way, whenever an Englishman would cry 'All right!' an 
American cries 'Go ahead!' which is somewhat expressive of the 
national character of the two countries.

The first half-mile of the road is over bridges made of loose 
planks laid across two parallel poles, which tilt up as the wheels 
roll over them; and IN the river.  The river has a clayey bottom 
and is full of holes, so that half a horse is constantly 
disappearing unexpectedly, and can't be found again for some time.

But we get past even this, and come to the road itself, which is a 
series of alternate swamps and gravel-pits.  A tremendous place is 
close before us, the black driver rolls his eyes, screws his mouth 
up very round, and looks straight between the two leaders, as if he 
were saying to himself, 'We have done this often before, but NOW I 
think we shall have a crash.'  He takes a rein in each hand; jerks 
and pulls at both; and dances on the splashboard with both feet 
(keeping his seat, of course) like the late lamented Ducrow on two 
of his fiery coursers.  We come to the spot, sink down in the mire 
nearly to the coach windows, tilt on one side at an angle of forty-
five degrees, and stick there.  The insides scream dismally; the 
coach stops; the horses flounder; all the other six coaches stop; 
and their four-and-twenty horses flounder likewise:  but merely for 
company, and in sympathy with ours.  Then the following 
circumstances occur.

BLACK DRIVER (to the horses).  'Hi!'

Nothing happens.  Insides scream again.

BLACK DRIVER (to the horses).  'Ho!'

Horses plunge, and splash the black driver.

GENTLEMAN INSIDE (looking out).  'Why, what on airth -

Gentleman receives a variety of splashes and draws his head in 
again, without finishing his question or waiting for an answer.

BLACK DRIVER (still to the horses).  'Jiddy!  Jiddy!'

Horses pull violently, drag the coach out of the hole, and draw it 
up a bank; so steep, that the black driver's legs fly up into the 
air, and he goes back among the luggage on the roof.  But he 
immediately recovers himself, and cries (still to the horses),

'Pill!'

No effect.  On the contrary, the coach begins to roll back upon No. 
2, which rolls back upon No. 3, which rolls back upon No. 4, and so 
on, until No. 7 is heard to curse and swear, nearly a quarter of a 
mile behind.

BLACK DRIVER (louder than before).  'Pill!'

Horses make another struggle to get up the bank, and again the 
coach rolls backward.

BLACK DRIVER (louder than before).  'Pe-e-e-ill!'

Horses make a desperate struggle.

BLACK DRIVER (recovering spirits).  'Hi, Jiddy, Jiddy, Pill!'

Horses make another effort.

BLACK DRIVER (with great vigour).  'Ally Loo!  Hi.  Jiddy, Jiddy.  
Pill.  Ally Loo!'

Horses almost do it.

BLACK DRIVER (with his eyes starting out of his head).  'Lee, den.  
Lee, dere.  Hi.  Jiddy, Jiddy.  Pill.  Ally Loo.  Lee-e-e-e-e!'

They run up the bank, and go down again on the other side at a 
fearful pace.  It is impossible to stop them, and at the bottom 
there is a deep hollow, full of water.  The coach rolls 
frightfully.  The insides scream.  The mud and water fly about us.  
The black driver dances like a madman.  Suddenly we are all right 
by some extraordinary means, and stop to breathe.

A black friend of the black driver is sitting on a fence.  The 
black driver recognises him by twirling his head round and round 
like a harlequin, rolling his eyes, shrugging his shoulders, and 
grinning from ear to ear.  He stops short, turns to me, and says:

'We shall get you through sa, like a fiddle, and hope a please you 
when we get you through sa.  Old 'ooman at home sa:' chuckling very 
much.  'Outside gentleman sa, he often remember old 'ooman at home 
sa,' grinning again.

'Ay ay, we'll take care of the old woman.  Don't be afraid.'

The black driver grins again, but there is another hole, and beyond 
that, another bank, close before us.  So he stops short:  cries (to 
the horses again) 'Easy.  Easy den.  Ease.  Steady.  Hi.  Jiddy.  
Pill.  Ally.  Loo,' but never 'Lee!' until we are reduced to the 
very last extremity, and are in the midst of difficulties, 
extrication from which appears to be all but impossible.

And so we do the ten miles or thereabouts in two hours and a half; 
breaking no bones, though bruising a great many; and in short 
getting through the distance, 'like a fiddle.'

This singular kind of coaching terminates at Fredericksburgh, 
whence there is a railway to Richmond.  The tract of country 
through which it takes its course was once productive; but the soil 
has been exhausted by the system of employing a great amount of 
slave labour in forcing crops, without strengthening the land:  and 
it is now little better than a sandy desert overgrown with trees.  
Dreary and uninteresting as its aspect is, I was glad to the heart 
to find anything on which one of the curses of this horrible 
institution has fallen; and had greater pleasure in contemplating 
the withered ground, than the richest and most thriving cultivation 
in the same place could possibly have afforded me.

In this district, as in all others where slavery sits brooding, (I 
have frequently heard this admitted, even by those who are its 
warmest advocates:) there is an air of ruin and decay abroad, which 
is inseparable from the system.  The barns and outhouses are 
mouldering away; the sheds are patched and half roofless; the log 
cabins (built in Virginia with external chimneys made of clay or 
wood) are squalid in the last degree.  There is no look of decent 
comfort anywhere.  The miserable stations by the railway side, the 
great wild wood-yards, whence the engine is supplied with fuel; the 
negro children rolling on the ground before the cabin doors, with 
dogs and pigs; the biped beasts of burden slinking past:  gloom and 
dejection are upon them all.

In the negro car belonging to the train in which we made this 
journey, were a mother and her children who had just been 
purchased; the husband and father being left behind with their old 
owner.  The children cried the whole way, and the mother was 
misery's picture.  The champion of Life, Liberty, and the Pursuit 
of Happiness, who had bought them, rode in the same train; and, 
every time we stopped, got down to see that they were safe.  The 
black in Sinbad's Travels with one eye in the middle of his 
forehead which shone like a burning coal, was nature's aristocrat 
compared with this white gentleman.

It was between six and seven o'clock in the evening, when we drove 
to the hotel:  in front of which, and on the top of the broad 
flight of steps leading to the door, two or three citizens were 
balancing themselves on rocking-chairs, and smoking cigars.  We 
found it a very large and elegant establishment, and were as well 
entertained as travellers need desire to be.  The climate being a 
thirsty one, there was never, at any hour of the day, a scarcity of 
loungers in the spacious bar, or a cessation of the mixing of cool 
liquors:  but they were a merrier people here, and had musical 
instruments playing to them o' nights, which it was a treat to hear 
again.

The next day, and the next, we rode and walked about the town, 
which is delightfully situated on eight hills, overhanging James 
River; a sparkling stream, studded here and there with bright 
islands, or brawling over broken rocks.  Although it was yet but 
the middle of March, the weather in this southern temperature was 
extremely warm; the peech-trees and magnolias were in full bloom; 
and the trees were green.  In a low ground among the hills, is a 
valley known as 'Bloody Run,' from a terrible conflict with the 
Indians which once occurred there.  It is a good place for such a 
struggle, and, like every other spot I saw associated with any 
legend of that wild people now so rapidly fading from the earth, 
interested me very much.

The city is the seat of the local parliament of Virginia; and in 
its shady legislative halls, some orators were drowsily holding 
forth to the hot noon day.  By dint of constant repetition, 
however, these constitutional sights had very little more interest 
for me than so many parochial vestries; and I was glad to exchange 
this one for a lounge in a well-arranged public library of some ten 
thousand volumes, and a visit to a tobacco manufactory, where the 
workmen are all slaves.

I saw in this place the whole process of picking, rolling, 
pressing, drying, packing in casks, and branding.  All the tobacco 
thus dealt with, was in course of manufacture for chewing; and one 
would have supposed there was enough in that one storehouse to have 
filled even the comprehensive jaws of America.  In this form, the 
weed looks like the oil-cake on which we fatten cattle; and even 
without reference to its consequences, is sufficiently uninviting.

Many of the workmen appeared to be strong men, and it is hardly 
necessary to add that they were all labouring quietly, then.  After 
two o'clock in the day, they are allowed to sing, a certain number 
at a time.  The hour striking while I was there, some twenty sang a 
hymn in parts, and sang it by no means ill; pursuing their work 
meanwhile.  A bell rang as I was about to leave, and they all 
poured forth into a building on the opposite side of the street to 
dinner.  I said several times that I should like to see them at 
their meal; but as the gentleman to whom I mentioned this desire 
appeared to be suddenly taken rather deaf, I did not pursue the 
request.  Of their appearance I shall have something to say, 
presently.

On the following day, I visited a plantation or farm, of about 
twelve hundred acres, on the opposite bank of the river.  Here 
again, although I went down with the owner of the estate, to 'the 
quarter,' as that part of it in which the slaves live is called, I 
was not invited to enter into any of their huts.  All I saw of 
them, was, that they were very crazy, wretched cabins, near to 
which groups of half-naked children basked in the sun, or wallowed 
on the dusty ground.  But I believe that this gentleman is a 
considerate and excellent master, who inherited his fifty slaves, 
and is neither a buyer nor a seller of human stock; and I am sure, 
from my own observation and conviction, that he is a kind-hearted, 
worthy man.

The planter's house was an airy, rustic dwelling, that brought 
Defoe's description of such places strongly to my recollection.  
The day was very warm, but the blinds being all closed, and the 
windows and doors set wide open, a shady coolness rustled through 
the rooms, which was exquisitely refreshing after the glare and 
heat without.  Before the windows was an open piazza, where, in 
what they call the hot weather - whatever that may be - they sling 
hammocks, and drink and doze luxuriously.  I do not know how their 
cool rejections may taste within the hammocks, but, having 
experience, I can report that, out of them, the mounds of ices and 
the bowls of mint-julep and sherry-cobbler they make in these 
latitudes, are refreshments never to be thought of afterwards, in 
summer, by those who would preserve contented minds.

There are two bridges across the river:  one belongs to the 
railroad, and the other, which is a very crazy affair, is the 
private property of some old lady in the neighbourhood, who levies 
tolls upon the townspeople.  Crossing this bridge, on my way back, 
I saw a notice painted on the gate, cautioning all persons to drive 
slowly:  under a penalty, if the offender were a white man, of five 
dollars; if a negro, fifteen stripes.

The same decay and gloom that overhang the way by which it is 
approached, hover above the town of Richmond.  There are pretty 
villas and cheerful houses in its streets, and Nature smiles upon 
the country round; but jostling its handsome residences, like 
slavery itself going hand in hand with many lofty virtues, are 
deplorable tenements, fences unrepaired, walls crumbling into 
ruinous heaps.  Hinting gloomily at things below the surface, 
these, and many other tokens of the same description, force 
themselves upon the notice, and are remembered with depressing 
influence, when livelier features are forgotten.

To those who are happily unaccustomed to them, the countenances in 
the streets and labouring-places, too, are shocking.  All men who 
know that there are laws against instructing slaves, of which the 
pains and penalties greatly exceed in their amount the fines 
imposed on those who maim and torture them, must be prepared to 
find their faces very low in the scale of intellectual expression.  
But the darkness - not of skin, but mind - which meets the 
stranger's eye at every turn; the brutalizing and blotting out of 
all fairer characters traced by Nature's hand; immeasurably outdo 
his worst belief.  That travelled creation of the great satirist's 
brain, who fresh from living among horses, peered from a high 
casement down upon his own kind with trembling horror, was scarcely 
more repelled and daunted by the sight, than those who look upon 
some of these faces for the first time must surely be.

I left the last of them behind me in the person of a wretched 
drudge, who, after running to and fro all day till midnight, and 
moping in his stealthy winks of sleep upon the stairs 
betweenwhiles, was washing the dark passages at four o'clock in the 
morning; and went upon my way with a grateful heart that I was not 
doomed to live where slavery was, and had never had my senses 
blunted to its wrongs and horrors in a slave-rocked cradle.

It had been my intention to proceed by James River and Chesapeake 
Bay to Baltimore; but one of the steamboats being absent from her 
station through some accident, and the means of conveyance being 
consequently rendered uncertain, we returned to Washington by the 
way we had come (there were two constables on board the steamboat, 
in pursuit of runaway slaves), and halting there again for one 
night, went on to Baltimore next afternoon.

The most comfortable of all the hotels of which I had any 
experience in the United States, and they were not a few, is 
Barnum's, in that city:  where the English traveller will find 
curtains to his bed, for the first and probably the last time in 
America (this is a disinterested remark, for I never use them); and 
where he will be likely to have enough water for washing himself, 
which is not at all a common case.

This capital of the state of Maryland is a bustling, busy town, 
with a great deal of traffic of various kinds, and in particular of 
water commerce.  That portion of the town which it most favours is 
none of the cleanest, it is true; but the upper part is of a very 
different character, and has many agreeable streets and public 
buildings.  The Washington Monument, which is a handsome pillar 
with a statue on its summit; the Medical College; and the Battle 
Monument in memory of an engagement with the British at North 
Point; are the most conspicuous among them.

There is a very good prison in this city, and the State 
Penitentiary is also among its institutions.  In this latter 
establishment there were two curious cases.

One was that of a young man, who had been tried for the murder of 
his father.  The evidence was entirely circumstantial, and was very 
conflicting and doubtful; nor was it possible to assign any motive 
which could have tempted him to the commission of so tremendous a 
crime.  He had been tried twice; and on the second occasion the 
jury felt so much hesitation in convicting him, that they found a 
verdict of manslaughter, or murder in the second degree; which it 
could not possibly be, as there had, beyond all doubt, been no 
quarrel or provocation, and if he were guilty at all, he was 
unquestionably guilty of murder in its broadest and worst 
signification.

The remarkable feature in the case was, that if the unfortunate 
deceased were not really murdered by this own son of his, he must 
have been murdered by his own brother.  The evidence lay in a most 
remarkable manner, between those two.  On all the suspicious 
points, the dead man's brother was the witness:  all the 
explanations for the prisoner (some of them extremely plausible) 
went, by construction and inference, to inculcate him as plotting 
to fix the guilt upon his nephew.  It must have been one of them:  
and the jury had to decide between two sets of suspicions, almost 
equally unnatural, unaccountable, and strange.

The other case, was that of a man who once went to a certain 
distiller's and stole a copper measure containing a quantity of 
liquor.  He was pursued and taken with the property in his 
possession, and was sentenced to two years' imprisonment.  On 
coming out of the jail, at the expiration of that term, he went 
back to the same distiller's, and stole the same copper measure 
containing the same quantity of liquor.  There was not the 
slightest reason to suppose that the man wished to return to 
prison:  indeed everything, but the commission of the offence, made 
directly against that assumption.  There are only two ways of 
accounting for this extraordinary proceeding.  One is, that after 
undergoing so much for this copper measure he conceived he had 
established a sort of claim and right to it.  The other that, by 
dint of long thinking about, it had become a monomania with him, 
and had acquired a fascination which he found it impossible to 
resist; swelling from an Earthly Copper Gallon into an Ethereal 
Golden Vat.

After remaining here a couple of days I bound myself to a rigid 
adherence to the plan I had laid down so recently, and resolved to 
set forward on our western journey without any more delay.  
Accordingly, having reduced the luggage within the smallest 
possible compass (by sending back to New York, to be afterwards 
forwarded to us in Canada, so much of it as was not absolutely 
wanted); and having procured the necessary credentials to banking-
houses on the way; and having moreover looked for two evenings at 
the setting sun, with as well-defined an idea of the country before 
us as if we had been going to travel into the very centre of that 
planet; we left Baltimore by another railway at half-past eight in 
the morning, and reached the town of York, some sixty miles off, by 
the early dinner-time of the Hotel which was the starting-place of 
the four-horse coach, wherein we were to proceed to Harrisburg.

This conveyance, the box of which I was fortunate enough to secure, 
had come down to meet us at the railroad station, and was as muddy 
and cumbersome as usual.  As more passengers were waiting for us at 
the inn-door, the coachman observed under his breath, in the usual 
self-communicative voice, looking the while at his mouldy harness 
as if it were to that he was addressing himself,

'I expect we shall want THE BIG coach.'

I could not help wondering within myself what the size of this big 
coach might be, and how many persons it might be designed to hold; 
for the vehicle which was too small for our purpose was something 
larger than two English heavy night coaches, and might have been 
the twin-brother of a French Diligence.  My speculations were 
speedily set at rest, however, for as soon as we had dined, there 
came rumbling up the street, shaking its sides like a corpulent 
giant, a kind of barge on wheels.  After much blundering and 
backing, it stopped at the door:  rolling heavily from side to side 
when its other motion had ceased, as if it had taken cold in its 
damp stable, and between that, and the having been required in its 
dropsical old age to move at any faster pace than a walk, were 
distressed by shortness of wind.

'If here ain't the Harrisburg mail at last, and dreadful bright and 
smart to look at too,' cried an elderly gentleman in some 
excitement, 'darn my mother!'

I don't know what the sensation of being darned may be, or whether 
a man's mother has a keener relish or disrelish of the process than 
anybody else; but if the endurance of this mysterious ceremony by 
the old lady in question had depended on the accuracy of her son's 
vision in respect to the abstract brightness and smartness of the 
Harrisburg mail, she would certainly have undergone its infliction.  
However, they booked twelve people inside; and the luggage 
(including such trifles as a large rocking-chair, and a good-sized 
dining-table) being at length made fast upon the roof, we started 
off in great state.

At the door of another hotel, there was another passenger to be 
taken up.

'Any room, sir?' cries the new passenger to the coachman.

'Well, there's room enough,' replies the coachman, without getting 
down, or even looking at him.

'There an't no room at all, sir,' bawls a gentleman inside.  Which 
another gentleman (also inside) confirms, by predicting that the 
attempt to introduce any more passengers 'won't fit nohow.'

The new passenger, without any expression of anxiety, looks into 
the coach, and then looks up at the coachman:  'Now, how do you 
mean to fix it?' says he, after a pause:  'for I MUST go.'

The coachman employs himself in twisting the lash of his whip into 
a knot, and takes no more notice of the question:  clearly 
signifying that it is anybody's business but his, and that the 
passengers would do well to fix it, among themselves.  In this 
state of things, matters seem to be approximating to a fix of 
another kind, when another inside passenger in a corner, who is 
nearly suffocated, cries faintly, 'I'll get out.'

This is no matter of relief or self-congratulation to the driver, 
for his immovable philosophy is perfectly undisturbed by anything 
that happens in the coach.  Of all things in the world, the coach 
would seem to be the very last upon his mind.  The exchange is 
made, however, and then the passenger who has given up his seat 
makes a third upon the box, seating himself in what he calls the 
middle; that is, with half his person on my legs, and the other 
half on the driver's.

'Go a-head, cap'en,' cries the colonel, who directs.

'Go-lang!' cries the cap'en to his company, the horses, and away we 
go.

We took up at a rural bar-room, after we had gone a few miles, an 
intoxicated gentleman who climbed upon the roof among the luggage, 
and subsequently slipping off without hurting himself, was seen in 
the distant perspective reeling back to the grog-shop where we had 
found him.  We also parted with more of our freight at different 
times, so that when we came to change horses, I was again alone 
outside.

The coachmen always change with the horses, and are usually as 
dirty as the coach.  The first was dressed like a very shabby 
English baker; the second like a Russian peasant:  for he wore a 
loose purple camlet robe, with a fur collar, tied round his waist 
with a parti-coloured worsted sash; grey trousers; light blue 
gloves:  and a cap of bearskin.  It had by this time come on to 
rain very heavily, and there was a cold damp mist besides, which 
penetrated to the skin.  I was glad to take advantage of a stoppage 
and get down to stretch my legs, shake the water off my great-coat, 
and swallow the usual anti-temperance recipe for keeping out the 
cold.

When I mounted to my seat again, I observed a new parcel lying on 
the coach roof, which I took to be a rather large fiddle in a brown 
bag.  In the course of a few miles, however, I discovered that it 
had a glazed cap at one end and a pair of muddy shoes at the other 
and further observation demonstrated it to be a small boy in a 
snuff-coloured coat, with his arms quite pinioned to his sides, by 
deep forcing into his pockets.  He was, I presume, a relative or 
friend of the coachman's, as he lay a-top of the luggage with his 
face towards the rain; and except when a change of position brought 
his shoes in contact with my hat, he appeared to be asleep.  At 
last, on some occasion of our stopping, this thing slowly upreared 
itself to the height of three feet six, and fixing its eyes on me, 
observed in piping accents, with a complaisant yawn, half quenched 
in an obliging air of friendly patronage, 'Well now, stranger, I 
guess you find this a'most like an English arternoon, hey?'

The scenery, which had been tame enough at first, was, for the last 
ten or twelve miles, beautiful.  Our road wound through the 
pleasant valley of the Susquehanna; the river, dotted with 
innumerable green islands, lay upon our right; and on the left, a 
steep ascent, craggy with broken rock, and dark with pine trees.  
The mist, wreathing itself into a hundred fantastic shapes, moved 
solemnly upon the water; and the gloom of evening gave to all an 
air of mystery and silence which greatly enhanced its natural 
interest.

We crossed this river by a wooden bridge, roofed and covered in on 
all sides, and nearly a mile in length.  It was profoundly dark; 
perplexed, with great beams, crossing and recrossing it at every 
possible angle; and through the broad chinks and crevices in the 
floor, the rapid river gleamed, far down below, like a legion of 
eyes.  We had no lamps; and as the horses stumbled and floundered 
through this place, towards the distant speck of dying light, it 
seemed interminable.  I really could not at first persuade myself 
as we rumbled heavily on, filling the bridge with hollow noises, 
and I held down my head to save it from the rafters above, but that 
I was in a painful dream; for I have often dreamed of toiling 
through such places, and as often argued, even at the time, 'this 
cannot be reality.'

At length, however, we emerged upon the streets of Harrisburg, 
whose feeble lights, reflected dismally from the wet ground, did 
not shine out upon a very cheerful city.  We were soon established 
in a snug hotel, which though smaller and far less splendid than 
many we put up at, it raised above them all in my remembrance, by 
having for its landlord the most obliging, considerate, and 
gentlemanly person I ever had to deal with.

As we were not to proceed upon our journey until the afternoon, I 
walked out, after breakfast the next morning, to look about me; and 
was duly shown a model prison on the solitary system, just erected, 
and as yet without an inmate; the trunk of an old tree to which 
Harris, the first settler here (afterwards buried under it), was 
tied by hostile Indians, with his funeral pile about him, when he 
was saved by the timely appearance of a friendly party on the 
opposite shore of the river; the local legislature (for there was 
another of those bodies here again, in full debate); and the other 
curiosities of the town.

I was very much interested in looking over a number of treaties 
made from time to time with the poor Indians, signed by the 
different chiefs at the period of their ratification, and preserved 
in the office of the Secretary to the Commonwealth.  These 
signatures, traced of course by their own hands, are rough drawings 
of the creatures or weapons they were called after.  Thus, the 
Great Turtle makes a crooked pen-and-ink outline of a great turtle; 
the Buffalo sketches a buffalo; the War Hatchet sets a rough image 
of that weapon for his mark.  So with the Arrow, the Fish, the 
Scalp, the Big Canoe, and all of them.

I could not but think - as I looked at these feeble and tremulous 
productions of hands which could draw the longest arrow to the head 
in a stout elk-horn bow, or split a bead or feather with a rifle-
ball - of Crabbe's musings over the Parish Register, and the 
irregular scratches made with a pen, by men who would plough a 
lengthy furrow straight from end to end.  Nor could I help 
bestowing many sorrowful thoughts upon the simple warriors whose 
hands and hearts were set there, in all truth and honesty; and who 
only learned in course of time from white men how to break their 
faith, and quibble out of forms and bonds.  I wonder, too, how many 
times the credulous Big Turtle, or trusting Little Hatchet, had put 
his mark to treaties which were falsely read to him; and had signed 
away, he knew not what, until it went and cast him loose upon the 
new possessors of the land, a savage indeed.

Our host announced, before our early dinner, that some members of 
the legislative body proposed to do us the honour of calling.  He 
had kindly yielded up to us his wife's own little parlour, and when 
I begged that he would show them in, I saw him look with painful 
apprehension at its pretty carpet; though, being otherwise occupied 
at the time, the cause of his uneasiness did not occur to me.

It certainly would have been more pleasant to all parties 
concerned, and would not, I think, have compromised their 
independence in any material degree, if some of these gentlemen had 
not only yielded to the prejudice in favour of spittoons, but had 
abandoned themselves, for the moment, even to the conventional 
absurdity of pocket-handkerchiefs.

It still continued to rain heavily, and when we went down to the 
Canal Boat (for that was the mode of conveyance by which we were to 
proceed) after dinner, the weather was as unpromising and 
obstinately wet as one would desire to see.  Nor was the sight of 
this canal boat, in which we were to spend three or four days, by 
any means a cheerful one; as it involved some uneasy speculations 
concerning the disposal of the passengers at night, and opened a 
wide field of inquiry touching the other domestic arrangements of 
the establishment, which was sufficiently disconcerting.

However, there it was - a barge with a little house in it, viewed 
from the outside; and a caravan at a fair, viewed from within:  the 
gentlemen being accommodated, as the spectators usually are, in one 
of those locomotive museums of penny wonders; and the ladies being 
partitioned off by a red curtain, after the manner of the dwarfs 
and giants in the same establishments, whose private lives are 
passed in rather close exclusiveness.

We sat here, looking silently at the row of little tables, which 
extended down both sides of the cabin, and listening to the rain as 
it dripped and pattered on the boat, and plashed with a dismal 
merriment in the water, until the arrival of the railway train, for 
whose final contribution to our stock of passengers, our departure 
was alone deferred.  It brought a great many boxes, which were 
bumped and tossed upon the roof, almost as painfully as if they had 
been deposited on one's own head, without the intervention of a 
porter's knot; and several damp gentlemen, whose clothes, on their 
drawing round the stove, began to steam again.  No doubt it would 
have been a thought more comfortable if the driving rain, which now 
poured down more soakingly than ever, had admitted of a window 
being opened, or if our number had been something less than thirty; 
but there was scarcely time to think as much, when a train of three 
horses was attached to the tow-rope, the boy upon the leader 
smacked his whip, the rudder creaked and groaned complainingly, and 
we had begun our journey.



CHAPTER X - SOME FURTHER ACCOUNT OF THE CANAL BOAT, ITS DOMESTIC 
ECONOMY, AND ITS PASSENGERS.  JOURNEY TO PITTSBURG ACROSS THE 
ALLEGHANY MOUNTAINS.  PITTSBURG



AS it continued to rain most perseveringly, we all remained below:  
the damp gentlemen round the stove, gradually becoming mildewed by 
the action of the fire; and the dry gentlemen lying at full length 
upon the seats, or slumbering uneasily with their faces on the 
tables, or walking up and down the cabin, which it was barely 
possible for a man of the middle height to do, without making bald 
places on his head by scraping it against the roof.  At about six 
o'clock, all the small tables were put together to form one long 
table, and everybody sat down to tea, coffee, bread, butter, 
salmon, shad, liver, steaks, potatoes, pickles, ham, chops, black-
puddings, and sausages.

'Will you try,' said my opposite neighbour, handing me a dish of 
potatoes, broken up in milk and butter, 'will you try some of these 
fixings?'

There are few words which perform such various duties as this word 
'fix.'  It is the Caleb Quotem of the American vocabulary.  You 
call upon a gentleman in a country town, and his help informs you 
that he is 'fixing himself' just now, but will be down directly:  
by which you are to understand that he is dressing.  You inquire, 
on board a steamboat, of a fellow-passenger, whether breakfast will 
be ready soon, and he tells you he should think so, for when he was 
last below, they were 'fixing the tables:' in other words, laying 
the cloth.  You beg a porter to collect your luggage, and he 
entreats you not to be uneasy, for he'll 'fix it presently:' and if 
you complain of indisposition, you are advised to have recourse to 
Doctor So-and-so, who will 'fix you' in no time.

One night, I ordered a bottle of mulled wine at an hotel where I 
was staying, and waited a long time for it; at length it was put 
upon the table with an apology from the landlord that he feared it 
wasn't 'fixed properly.' And I recollect once, at a stage-coach 
dinner, overhearing a very stern gentleman demand of a waiter who 
presented him with a plate of underdone roast-beef, 'whether he 
called THAT, fixing God A'mighty's vittles?'

There is no doubt that the meal, at which the invitation was 
tendered to me which has occasioned this digression, was disposed 
of somewhat ravenously; and that the gentlemen thrust the broad-
bladed knives and the two-pronged forks further down their throats 
than I ever saw the same weapons go before, except in the hands of 
a skilful juggler:  but no man sat down until the ladies were 
seated; or omitted any little act of politeness which could 
contribute to their comfort.  Nor did I ever once, on any occasion, 
anywhere, during my rambles in America, see a woman exposed to the 
slightest act of rudeness, incivility, or even inattention.

By the time the meal was over, the rain, which seemed to have worn 
itself out by coming down so fast, was nearly over too; and it 
became feasible to go on deck:  which was a great relief, 
notwithstanding its being a very small deck, and being rendered 
still smaller by the luggage, which was heaped together in the 
middle under a tarpaulin covering; leaving, on either side, a path 
so narrow, that it became a science to walk to and fro without 
tumbling overboard into the canal.  It was somewhat embarrassing at 
first, too, to have to duck nimbly every five minutes whenever the 
man at the helm cried 'Bridge!' and sometimes, when the cry was 
'Low Bridge,' to lie down nearly flat.  But custom familiarises one 
to anything, and there were so many bridges that it took a very 
short time to get used to this.

As night came on, and we drew in sight of the first range of hills, 
which are the outposts of the Alleghany Mountains, the scenery, 
which had been uninteresting hitherto, became more bold and 
striking.  The wet ground reeked and smoked, after the heavy fall 
of rain, and the croaking of the frogs (whose noise in these parts 
is almost incredible) sounded as though a million of fairy teams 
with bells were travelling through the air, and keeping pace with 
us.  The night was cloudy yet, but moonlight too:  and when we 
crossed the Susquehanna river - over which there is an 
extraordinary wooden bridge with two galleries, one above the 
other, so that even there, two boat teams meeting, may pass without 
confusion - it was wild and grand.

I have mentioned my having been in some uncertainty and doubt, at 
first, relative to the sleeping arrangements on board this boat.  I 
remained in the same vague state of mind until ten o'clock or 
thereabouts, when going below, I found suspended on either side of 
the cabin, three long tiers of hanging bookshelves, designed 
apparently for volumes of the small octavo size.  Looking with 
greater attention at these contrivances (wondering to find such 
literary preparations in such a place), I descried on each shelf a 
sort of microscopic sheet and blanket; then I began dimly to 
comprehend that the passengers were the library, and that they were 
to be arranged, edge-wise, on these shelves, till morning.

I was assisted to this conclusion by seeing some of them gathered 
round the master of the boat, at one of the tables, drawing lots 
with all the anxieties and passions of gamesters depicted in their 
countenances; while others, with small pieces of cardboard in their 
hands, were groping among the shelves in search of numbers 
corresponding with those they had drawn.  As soon as any gentleman 
found his number, he took possession of it by immediately 
undressing himself and crawling into bed.  The rapidity with which 
an agitated gambler subsided into a snoring slumberer, was one of 
the most singular effects I have ever witnessed.  As to the ladies, 
they were already abed, behind the red curtain, which was carefully 
drawn and pinned up the centre; though as every cough, or sneeze, 
or whisper, behind this curtain, was perfectly audible before it, 
we had still a lively consciousness of their society.

The politeness of the person in authority had secured to me a shelf 
in a nook near this red curtain, in some degree removed from the 
great body of sleepers:  to which place I retired, with many 
acknowledgments to him for his attention.  I found it, on after-
measurement, just the width of an ordinary sheet of Bath post 
letter-paper; and I was at first in some uncertainty as to the best 
means of getting into it.  But the shelf being a bottom one, I 
finally determined on lying upon the floor, rolling gently in, 
stopping immediately I touched the mattress, and remaining for the 
night with that side uppermost, whatever it might be.  Luckily, I 
came upon my back at exactly the right moment.  I was much alarmed 
on looking upward, to see, by the shape of his half-yard of sacking 
(which his weight had bent into an exceedingly tight bag), that 
there was a very heavy gentleman above me, whom the slender cords 
seemed quite incapable of holding; and I could not help reflecting 
upon the grief of my wife and family in the event of his coming 
down in the night.  But as I could not have got up again without a 
severe bodily struggle, which might have alarmed the ladies; and as 
I had nowhere to go to, even if I had; I shut my eyes upon the 
danger, and remained there.

One of two remarkable circumstances is indisputably a fact, with 
reference to that class of society who travel in these boats.  
Either they carry their restlessness to such a pitch that they 
never sleep at all; or they expectorate in dreams, which would be a 
remarkable mingling of the real and ideal.  All night long, and 
every night, on this canal, there was a perfect storm and tempest 
of spitting; and once my coat, being in the very centre of the 
hurricane sustained by five gentlemen (which moved vertically, 
strictly carrying out Reid's Theory of the Law of Storms), I was 
fain the next morning to lay it on the deck, and rub it down with 
fair water before it was in a condition to be worn again.

Between five and six o'clock in the morning we got up, and some of 
us went on deck, to give them an opportunity of taking the shelves 
down; while others, the morning being very cold, crowded round the 
rusty stove, cherishing the newly kindled fire, and filling the 
grate with those voluntary contributions of which they had been so 
liberal all night.  The washing accommodations were primitive.  
There was a tin ladle chained to the deck, with which every 
gentleman who thought it necessary to cleanse himself (many were 
superior to this weakness), fished the dirty water out of the 
canal, and poured it into a tin basin, secured in like manner.  
There was also a jack-towel.  And, hanging up before a little 
looking-glass in the bar, in the immediate vicinity of the bread 
and cheese and biscuits, were a public comb and hair-brush.

At eight o'clock, the shelves being taken down and put away and the 
tables joined together, everybody sat down to the tea, coffee, 
bread, butter, salmon, shad, liver, steak, potatoes, pickles, ham, 
chops, black-puddings, and sausages, all over again.  Some were 
fond of compounding this variety, and having it all on their plates 
at once.  As each gentleman got through his own personal amount of 
tea, coffee, bread, butter, salmon, shad, liver, steak, potatoes, 
pickles, ham, chops, black-puddings, and sausages, he rose up and 
walked off.  When everybody had done with everything, the fragments 
were cleared away:  and one of the waiters appearing anew in the 
character of a barber, shaved such of the company as desired to be 
shaved; while the remainder looked on, or yawned over their 
newspapers.  Dinner was breakfast again, without the tea and 
coffee; and supper and breakfast were identical.

There was a man on board this boat, with a light fresh-coloured 
face, and a pepper-and-salt suit of clothes, who was the most 
inquisitive fellow that can possibly be imagined.  He never spoke 
otherwise than interrogatively.  He was an embodied inquiry.  
Sitting down or standing up, still or moving, walking the deck or 
taking his meals, there he was, with a great note of interrogation 
in each eye, two in his cocked ears, two more in his turned-up nose 
and chin, at least half a dozen more about the corners of his 
mouth, and the largest one of all in his hair, which was brushed 
pertly off his forehead in a flaxen clump.  Every button in his 
clothes said, 'Eh?  What's that?  Did you speak?  Say that again, 
will you?'  He was always wide awake, like the enchanted bride who 
drove her husband frantic; always restless; always thirsting for 
answers; perpetually seeking and never finding.  There never was 
such a curious man.

I wore a fur great-coat at that time, and before we were well clear 
of the wharf, he questioned me concerning it, and its price, and 
where I bought it, and when, and what fur it was, and what it 
weighed, and what it cost.  Then he took notice of my watch, and 
asked me what THAT cost, and whether it was a French watch, and 
where I got it, and how I got it, and whether I bought it or had it 
given me, and how it went, and where the key-hole was, and when I 
wound it, every night or every morning, and whether I ever forgot 
to wind it at all, and if I did, what then?  Where had I been to 
last, and where was I going next, and where was I going after that, 
and had I seen the President, and what did he say, and what did I 
say, and what did he say when I had said that?  Eh?  Lor now! do 
tell!

Finding that nothing would satisfy him, I evaded his questions 
after the first score or two, and in particular pleaded ignorance 
respecting the name of the fur whereof the coat was made.  I am 
unable to say whether this was the reason, but that coat fascinated 
him afterwards; he usually kept close behind me as I walked, and 
moved as I moved, that he might look at it the better; and he 
frequently dived into narrow places after me at the risk of his 
life, that he might have the satisfaction of passing his hand up 
the back, and rubbing it the wrong way.

We had another odd specimen on board, of a different kind.  This 
was a thin-faced, spare-figured man of middle age and stature, 
dressed in a dusty drabbish-coloured suit, such as I never saw 
before.  He was perfectly quiet during the first part of the 
journey:  indeed I don't remember having so much as seen him until 
he was brought out by circumstances, as great men often are.  The 
conjunction of events which made him famous, happened, briefly, 
thus.

The canal extends to the foot of the mountain, and there, of 
course, it stops; the passengers being conveyed across it by land 
carriage, and taken on afterwards by another canal boat, the 
counterpart of the first, which awaits them on the other side.  
There are two canal lines of passage-boats; one is called The 
Express, and one (a cheaper one) The Pioneer.  The Pioneer gets 
first to the mountain, and waits for the Express people to come up; 
both sets of passengers being conveyed across it at the same time.  
We were the Express company; but when we had crossed the mountain, 
and had come to the second boat, the proprietors took it into their 
beads to draft all the Pioneers into it likewise, so that we were 
five-and-forty at least, and the accession of passengers was not at 
all of that kind which improved the prospect of sleeping at night.  
Our people grumbled at this, as people do in such cases; but 
suffered the boat to be towed off with the whole freight aboard 
nevertheless; and away we went down the canal.  At home, I should 
have protested lustily, but being a foreigner here, I held my 
peace.  Not so this passenger.  He cleft a path among the people on 
deck (we were nearly all on deck), and without addressing anybody 
whomsoever, soliloquised as follows:

'This may suit YOU, this may, but it don't suit ME.  This may be 
all very well with Down Easters, and men of Boston raising, but it 
won't suit my figure nohow; and no two ways about THAT; and so I 
tell you.  Now!  I'm from the brown forests of Mississippi, I am, 
and when the sun shines on me, it does shine - a little.  It don't 
glimmer where I live, the sun don't.  No.  I'm a brown forester, I 
am.  I an't a Johnny Cake.  There are no smooth skins where I live.  
We're rough men there.  Rather.  If Down Easters and men of Boston 
raising like this, I'm glad of it, but I'm none of that raising nor 
of that breed.  No.  This company wants a little fixing, IT does.  
I'm the wrong sort of man for 'em, I am.  They won't like me, THEY 
won't.  This is piling of it up, a little too mountainous, this 
is.'  At the end of every one of these short sentences he turned 
upon his heel, and walked the other way; checking himself abruptly 
when he had finished another short sentence, and turning back 
again.

It is impossible for me to say what terrific meaning was hidden in 
the words of this brown forester, but I know that the other 
passengers looked on in a sort of admiring horror, and that 
presently the boat was put back to the wharf, and as many of the 
Pioneers as could be coaxed or bullied into going away, were got 
rid of.

When we started again, some of the boldest spirits on board, made 
bold to say to the obvious occasion of this improvement in our 
prospects, 'Much obliged to you, sir;' whereunto the brown forester 
(waving his hand, and still walking up and down as before), 
replied, 'No you an't.  You're none o' my raising.  You may act for 
yourselves, YOU may.  I have pinted out the way.  Down Easters and 
Johnny Cakes can follow if they please.  I an't a Johnny Cake, I 
an't.  I am from the brown forests of the Mississippi, I am' - and 
so on, as before.  He was unanimously voted one of the tables for 
his bed at night - there is a great contest for the tables - in 
consideration for his public services:  and he had the warmest 
corner by the stove throughout the rest of the journey.  But I 
never could find out that he did anything except sit there; nor did 
I hear him speak again until, in the midst of the bustle and 
turmoil of getting the luggage ashore in the dark at Pittsburg, I 
stumbled over him as he sat smoking a cigar on the cabin steps, and 
heard him muttering to himself, with a short laugh of defiance, 'I 
an't a Johnny Cake, - I an't.  I'm from the brown forests of the 
Mississippi, I am, damme!'  I am inclined to argue from this, that 
he had never left off saying so; but I could not make an affidavit 
of that part of the story, if required to do so by my Queen and 
Country.

As we have not reached Pittsburg yet, however, in the order of our 
narrative, I may go on to remark that breakfast was perhaps the 
least desirable meal of the day, as in addition to the many savoury 
odours arising from the eatables already mentioned, there were 
whiffs of gin, whiskey, brandy, and rum, from the little bar hard 
by, and a decided seasoning of stale tobacco.  Many of the 
gentlemen passengers were far from particular in respect of their 
linen, which was in some cases as yellow as the little rivulets 
that had trickled from the corners of their mouths in chewing, and 
dried there.  Nor was the atmosphere quite free from zephyr 
whisperings of the thirty beds which had just been cleared away, 
and of which we were further and more pressingly reminded by the 
occasional appearance on the table-cloth of a kind of Game, not 
mentioned in the Bill of Fare.

And yet despite these oddities - and even they had, for me at 
least, a humour of their own - there was much in this mode of 
travelling which I heartily enjoyed at the time, and look back upon 
with great pleasure.  Even the running up, bare-necked, at five 
o'clock in the morning, from the tainted cabin to the dirty deck; 
scooping up the icy water, plunging one's head into it, and drawing 
it out, all fresh and glowing with the cold; was a good thing.  The 
fast, brisk walk upon the towing-path, between that time and 
breakfast, when every vein and artery seemed to tingle with health; 
the exquisite beauty of the opening day, when light came gleaming 
off from everything; the lazy motion of the boat, when one lay idly 
on the deck, looking through, rather than at, the deep blue sky; 
the gliding on at night, so noiselessly, past frowning hills, 
sullen with dark trees, and sometimes angry in one red, burning 
spot high up, where unseen men lay crouching round a fire; the 
shining out of the bright stars undisturbed by noise of wheels or 
steam, or any other sound than the limpid rippling of the water as 
the boat went on:  all these were pure delights.

Then there were new settlements and detached log-cabins and frame-
houses, full of interest for strangers from an old country:  cabins 
with simple ovens, outside, made of clay; and lodgings for the pigs 
nearly as good as many of the human quarters; broken windows, 
patched with worn-out hats, old clothes, old boards, fragments of 
blankets and paper; and home-made dressers standing in the open air 
without the door, whereon was ranged the household store, not hard 
to count, of earthen jars and pots.  The eye was pained to see the 
stumps of great trees thickly strewn in every field of wheat, and 
seldom to lose the eternal swamp and dull morass, with hundreds of 
rotten trunks and twisted branches steeped in its unwholesome 
water.  It was quite sad and oppressive, to come upon great tracts 
where settlers had been burning down the trees, and where their 
wounded bodies lay about, like those of murdered creatures, while 
here and there some charred and blackened giant reared aloft two 
withered arms, and seemed to call down curses on his foes.  
Sometimes, at night, the way wound through some lonely gorge, like 
a mountain pass in Scotland, shining and coldly glittering in the 
light of the moon, and so closed in by high steep hills all round, 
that there seemed to be no egress save through the narrower path by 
which we had come, until one rugged hill-side seemed to open, and 
shutting out the moonlight as we passed into its gloomy throat, 
wrapped our new course in shade and darkness.

We had left Harrisburg on Friday.  On Sunday morning we arrived at 
the foot of the mountain, which is crossed by railroad.  There are 
ten inclined planes; five ascending, and five descending; the 
carriages are dragged up the former, and let slowly down the 
latter, by means of stationary engines; the comparatively level 
spaces between, being traversed, sometimes by horse, and sometimes 
by engine power, as the case demands.  Occasionally the rails are 
laid upon the extreme verge of a giddy precipice; and looking from 
the carriage window, the traveller gazes sheer down, without a 
stone or scrap of fence between, into the mountain depths below.  
The journey is very carefully made, however; only two carriages 
travelling together; and while proper precautions are taken, is not 
to be dreaded for its dangers.

It was very pretty travelling thus, at a rapid pace along the 
heights of the mountain in a keen wind, to look down into a valley 
full of light and softness; catching glimpses, through the tree-
tops, of scattered cabins; children running to the doors; dogs 
bursting out to bark, whom we could see without hearing:  terrified 
pigs scampering homewards; families sitting out in their rude 
gardens; cows gazing upward with a stupid indifference; men in 
their shirt-sleeves looking on at their unfinished houses, planning 
out to-morrow's work; and we riding onward, high above them, like a 
whirlwind.  It was amusing, too, when we had dined, and rattled 
down a steep pass, having no other moving power than the weight of 
the carriages themselves, to see the engine released, long after 
us, come buzzing down alone, like a great insect, its back of green 
and gold so shining in the sun, that if it had spread a pair of 
wings and soared away, no one would have had occasion, as I 
fancied, for the least surprise.  But it stopped short of us in a 
very business-like manner when we reached the canal:  and, before 
we left the wharf, went panting up this hill again, with the 
passengers who had waited our arrival for the means of traversing 
the road by which we had come.

On the Monday evening, furnace fires and clanking hammers on the 
banks of the canal, warned us that we approached the termination of 
this part of our journey.  After going through another dreamy place 
- a long aqueduct across the Alleghany River, which was stranger 
than the bridge at Harrisburg, being a vast, low, wooden chamber 
full of water - we emerged upon that ugly confusion of backs of 
buildings and crazy galleries and stairs, which always abuts on 
water, whether it be river, sea, canal, or ditch:  and were at 
Pittsburg.

Pittsburg is like Birmingham in England; at least its townspeople 
say so.  Setting aside the streets, the shops, the houses, waggons, 
factories, public buildings, and population, perhaps it may be.  It 
certainly has a great quantity of smoke hanging about it, and is 
famous for its iron-works.  Besides the prison to which I have 
already referred, this town contains a pretty arsenal and other 
institutions.  It is very beautifully situated on the Alleghany 
River, over which there are two bridges; and the villas of the 
wealthier citizens sprinkled about the high grounds in the 
neighbourhood, are pretty enough.  We lodged at a most excellent 
hotel, and were admirably served.  As usual it was full of 
boarders, was very large, and had a broad colonnade to every story 
of the house.

We tarried here three days.  Our next point was Cincinnati:  and as 
this was a steamboat journey, and western steamboats usually blow 
up one or two a week in the season, it was advisable to collect 
opinions in reference to the comparative safety of the vessels 
bound that way, then lying in the river.  One called the Messenger 
was the best recommended.  She had been advertised to start 
positively, every day for a fortnight or so, and had not gone yet, 
nor did her captain seem to have any very fixed intention on the 
subject.  But this is the custom:  for if the law were to bind down 
a free and independent citizen to keep his word with the public, 
what would become of the liberty of the subject?  Besides, it is in 
the way of trade.  And if passengers be decoyed in the way of 
trade, and people be inconvenienced in the way of trade, what man, 
who is a sharp tradesman himself, shall say, 'We must put a stop to 
this?'

Impressed by the deep solemnity of the public announcement, I 
(being then ignorant of these usages) was for hurrying on board in 
a breathless state, immediately; but receiving private and 
confidential information that the boat would certainly not start 
until Friday, April the First, we made ourselves very comfortable 
in the mean while, and went on board at noon that day.



CHAPTER XI - FROM PITTSBURG TO CINCINNATI IN A WESTERN STEAMBOAT.  
CINCINNATI



THE Messenger was one among a crowd of high-pressure steamboats, 
clustered together by a wharf-side, which, looked down upon from 
the rising ground that forms the landing-place, and backed by the 
lofty bank on the opposite side of the river, appeared no larger 
than so many floating models.  She had some forty passengers on 
board, exclusive of the poorer persons on the lower deck; and in 
half an hour, or less, proceeded on her way.

We had, for ourselves, a tiny state-room with two berths in it, 
opening out of the ladies' cabin.  There was, undoubtedly, 
something satisfactory in this 'location,' inasmuch as it was in 
the stern, and we had been a great many times very gravely 
recommended to keep as far aft as possible, 'because the steamboats 
generally blew up forward.'  Nor was this an unnecessary caution, 
as the occurrence and circumstances of more than one such fatality 
during our stay sufficiently testified.  Apart from this source of 
self-congratulation, it was an unspeakable relief to have any 
place, no matter how confined, where one could be alone:  and as 
the row of little chambers of which this was one, had each a second 
glass-door besides that in the ladies' cabin, which opened on a 
narrow gallery outside the vessel, where the other passengers 
seldom came, and where one could sit in peace and gaze upon the 
shifting prospect, we took possession of our new quarters with much 
pleasure.

If the native packets I have already described be unlike anything 
we are in the habit of seeing on water, these western vessels are 
still more foreign to all the ideas we are accustomed to entertain 
of boats.  I hardly know what to liken them to, or how to describe 
them.

In the first place, they have no mast, cordage, tackle, rigging, or 
other such boat-like gear; nor have they anything in their shape at 
all calculated to remind one of a boat's head, stem, sides, or 
keel.  Except that they are in the water, and display a couple of 
paddle-boxes, they might be intended, for anything that appears to 
the contrary, to perform some unknown service, high and dry, upon a 
mountain top.  There is no visible deck, even:  nothing but a long, 
black, ugly roof covered with burnt-out feathery sparks; above 
which tower two iron chimneys, and a hoarse escape valve, and a 
glass steerage-house.  Then, in order as the eye descends towards 
the water, are the sides, and doors, and windows of the state-
rooms, jumbled as oddly together as though they formed a small 
street, built by the varying tastes of a dozen men:  the whole is 
supported on beams and pillars resting on a dirty barge, but a few 
inches above the water's edge:  and in the narrow space between 
this upper structure and this barge's deck, are the furnace fires 
and machinery, open at the sides to every wind that blows, and 
every storm of rain it drives along its path.

Passing one of these boats at night, and seeing the great body of 
fire, exposed as I have just described, that rages and roars 
beneath the frail pile of painted wood:  the machinery, not warded 
off or guarded in any way, but doing its work in the midst of the 
crowd of idlers and emigrants and children, who throng the lower 
deck:  under the management, too, of reckless men whose 
acquaintance with its mysteries may have been of six months' 
standing:  one feels directly that the wonder is, not that there 
should be so many fatal accidents, but that any journey should be 
safely made.

Within, there is one long narrow cabin, the whole length of the 
boat; from which the state-rooms open, on both sides.  A small 
portion of it at the stern is partitioned off for the ladies; and 
the bar is at the opposite extreme.  There is a long table down the 
centre, and at either end a stove.  The washing apparatus is 
forward, on the deck.  It is a little better than on board the 
canal boat, but not much.  In all modes of travelling, the American 
customs, with reference to the means of personal cleanliness and 
wholesome ablution, are extremely negligent and filthy; and I 
strongly incline to the belief that a considerable amount of 
illness is referable to this cause.

We are to be on board the Messenger three days:  arriving at 
Cincinnati (barring accidents) on Monday morning.  There are three 
meals a day.  Breakfast at seven, dinner at half-past twelve, 
supper about six.  At each, there are a great many small dishes and 
plates upon the table, with very little in them; so that although 
there is every appearance of a mighty 'spread,' there is seldom 
really more than a joint:  except for those who fancy slices of 
beet-root, shreds of dried beef, complicated entanglements of 
yellow pickle; maize, Indian corn, apple-sauce, and pumpkin.

Some people fancy all these little dainties together (and sweet 
preserves beside), by way of relish to their roast pig.  They are 
generally those dyspeptic ladies and gentlemen who eat unheard-of 
quantities of hot corn bread (almost as good for the digestion as a 
kneaded pin-cushion), for breakfast, and for supper.  Those who do 
not observe this custom, and who help themselves several times 
instead, usually suck their knives and forks meditatively, until 
they have decided what to take next:  then pull them out of their 
mouths:  put them in the dish; help themselves; and fall to work 
again.  At dinner, there is nothing to drink upon the table, but 
great jugs full of cold water.  Nobody says anything, at any meal, 
to anybody.  All the passengers are very dismal, and seem to have 
tremendous secrets weighing on their minds.  There is no 
conversation, no laughter, no cheerfulness, no sociality, except in 
spitting; and that is done in silent fellowship round the stove, 
when the meal is over.  Every man sits down, dull and languid; 
swallows his fare as if breakfasts, dinners, and suppers, were 
necessities of nature never to be coupled with recreation or 
enjoyment; and having bolted his food in a gloomy silence, bolts 
himself, in the same state.  But for these animal observances, you 
might suppose the whole male portion of the company to be the 
melancholy ghosts of departed book-keepers, who had fallen dead at 
the desk:  such is their weary air of business and calculation.  
Undertakers on duty would be sprightly beside them; and a collation 
of funeral-baked meats, in comparison with these meals, would be a 
sparkling festivity.

The people are all alike, too.  There is no diversity of character.  
They travel about on the same errands, say and do the same things 
in exactly the same manner, and follow in the same dull cheerless 
round.  All down the long table, there is scarcely a man who is in 
anything different from his neighbour.  It is quite a relief to 
have, sitting opposite, that little girl of fifteen with the 
loquacious chin:  who, to do her justice, acts up to it, and fully 
identifies nature's handwriting, for of all the small chatterboxes 
that ever invaded the repose of drowsy ladies' cabin, she is the 
first and foremost.  The beautiful girl, who sits a little beyond 
her - farther down the table there - married the young man with the 
dark whiskers, who sits beyond HER, only last month.  They are 
going to settle in the very Far West, where he has lived four 
years, but where she has never been.  They were both overturned in 
a stage-coach the other day (a bad omen anywhere else, where 
overturns are not so common), and his head, which bears the marks 
of a recent wound, is bound up still.  She was hurt too, at the 
same time, and lay insensible for some days; bright as her eyes 
are, now.

Further down still, sits a man who is going some miles beyond their 
place of destination, to 'improve' a newly-discovered copper mine.  
He carries the village - that is to be - with him:  a few frame 
cottages, and an apparatus for smelting the copper.  He carries its 
people too.  They are partly American and partly Irish, and herd 
together on the lower deck; where they amused themselves last 
evening till the night was pretty far advanced, by alternately 
firing off pistols and singing hymns.

They, and the very few who have been left at table twenty minutes, 
rise, and go away.  We do so too; and passing through our little 
state-room, resume our seats in the quiet gallery without.

A fine broad river always, but in some parts much wider than in 
others:  and then there is usually a green island, covered with 
trees, dividing it into two streams.  Occasionally, we stop for a 
few minutes, maybe to take in wood, maybe for passengers, at some 
small town or village (I ought to say city, every place is a city 
here); but the banks are for the most part deep solitudes, 
overgrown with trees, which, hereabouts, are already in leaf and 
very green.  For miles, and miles, and miles, these solitudes are 
unbroken by any sign of human life or trace of human footstep; nor 
is anything seen to move about them but the blue jay, whose colour 
is so bright, and yet so delicate, that it looks like a flying 
flower.  At lengthened intervals a log cabin, with its little space 
of cleared land about it, nestles under a rising ground, and sends 
its thread of blue smoke curling up into the sky.  It stands in the 
corner of the poor field of wheat, which is full of great unsightly 
stumps, like earthy butchers'-blocks.  Sometimes the ground is only 
just now cleared:  the felled trees lying yet upon the soil:  and 
the log-house only this morning begun.  As we pass this clearing, 
the settler leans upon his axe or hammer, and looks wistfully at 
the people from the world.  The children creep out of the temporary 
hut, which is like a gipsy tent upon the ground, and clap their 
hands and shout.  The dog only glances round at us, and then looks 
up into his master's face again, as if he were rendered uneasy by 
any suspension of the common business, and had nothing more to do 
with pleasurers.  And still there is the same, eternal foreground.  
The river has washed away its banks, and stately trees have fallen 
down into the stream.  Some have been there so long, that they are 
mere dry, grizzly skeletons.  Some have just toppled over, and 
having earth yet about their roots, are bathing their green heads 
in the river, and putting forth new shoots and branches.  Some are 
almost sliding down, as you look at them.  And some were drowned so 
long ago, that their bleached arms start out from the middle of the 
current, and seem to try to grasp the boat, and drag it under 
water.

Through such a scene as this, the unwieldy machine takes its 
hoarse, sullen way:  venting, at every revolution of the paddles, a 
loud high-pressure blast; enough, one would think, to waken up the 
host of Indians who lie buried in a great mound yonder:  so old, 
that mighty oaks and other forest trees have struck their roots 
into its earth; and so high, that it is a hill, even among the 
hills that Nature planted round it.  The very river, as though it 
shared one's feelings of compassion for the extinct tribes who 
lived so pleasantly here, in their blessed ignorance of white 
existence, hundreds of years ago, steals out of its way to ripple 
near this mound:  and there are few places where the Ohio sparkles 
more brightly than in the Big Grave Creek.

All this I see as I sit in the little stern-gallery mentioned just 
now.  Evening slowly steals upon the landscape and changes it 
before me, when we stop to set some emigrants ashore.

Five men, as many women, and a little girl.  All their worldly 
goods are a bag, a large chest and an old chair:  one, old, high-
backed, rush-bottomed chair:  a solitary settler in itself.  They 
are rowed ashore in the boat, while the vessel stands a little off 
awaiting its return, the water being shallow.  They are landed at 
the foot of a high bank, on the summit of which are a few log 
cabins, attainable only by a long winding path.  It is growing 
dusk; but the sun is very red, and shines in the water and on some 
of the tree-tops, like fire.

The men get out of the boat first; help out the women; take out the 
bag, the chest, the chair; bid the rowers 'good-bye;' and shove the 
boat off for them.  At the first plash of the oars in the water, 
the oldest woman of the party sits down in the old chair, close to 
the water's edge, without speaking a word.  None of the others sit 
down, though the chest is large enough for many seats.  They all 
stand where they landed, as if stricken into stone; and look after 
the boat.  So they remain, quite still and silent:  the old woman 
and her old chair, in the centre the bag and chest upon the shore, 
without anybody heeding them all eyes fixed upon the boat.  It 
comes alongside, is made fast, the men jump on board, the engine is 
put in motion, and we go hoarsely on again.  There they stand yet, 
without the motion of a hand.  I can see them through my glass, 
when, in the distance and increasing darkness, they are mere specks 
to the eye:  lingering there still:  the old woman in the old 
chair, and all the rest about her:  not stirring in the least 
degree.  And thus I slowly lose them.

The night is dark, and we proceed within the shadow of the wooded 
bank, which makes it darker.  After gliding past the sombre maze of 
boughs for a long time, we come upon an open space where the tall 
trees are burning.  The shape of every branch and twig is expressed 
in a deep red glow, and as the light wind stirs and ruffles it, 
they seem to vegetate in fire.  It is such a sight as we read of in 
legends of enchanted forests:  saving that it is sad to see these 
noble works wasting away so awfully, alone; and to think how many 
years must come and go before the magic that created them will rear 
their like upon this ground again.  But the time will come; and 
when, in their changed ashes, the growth of centuries unborn has 
struck its roots, the restless men of distant ages will repair to 
these again unpeopled solitudes; and their fellows, in cities far 
away, that slumber now, perhaps, beneath the rolling sea, will read 
in language strange to any ears in being now, but very old to them, 
of primeval forests where the axe was never heard, and where the 
jungled ground was never trodden by a human foot.

Midnight and sleep blot out these scenes and thoughts:  and when 
the morning shines again, it gilds the house-tops of a lively city, 
before whose broad paved wharf the boat is moored; with other 
boats, and flags, and moving wheels, and hum of men around it; as 
though there were not a solitary or silent rood of ground within 
the compass of a thousand miles.

Cincinnati is a beautiful city; cheerful, thriving, and animated.  
I have not often seen a place that commends itself so favourably 
and pleasantly to a stranger at the first glance as this does:  
with its clean houses of red and white, its well-paved roads, and 
foot-ways of bright tile.  Nor does it become less prepossessing on 
a closer acquaintance.  The streets are broad and airy, the shops 
extremely good, the private residences remarkable for their 
elegance and neatness.  There is something of invention and fancy 
in the varying styles of these latter erections, which, after the 
dull company of the steamboat, is perfectly delightful, as 
conveying an assurance that there are such qualities still in 
existence.  The disposition to ornament these pretty villas and 
render them attractive, leads to the culture of trees and flowers, 
and the laying out of well-kept gardens, the sight of which, to 
those who walk along the streets, is inexpressibly refreshing and 
agreeable.  I was quite charmed with the appearance of the town, 
and its adjoining suburb of Mount Auburn:  from which the city, 
lying in an amphitheatre of hills, forms a picture of remarkable 
beauty, and is seen to great advantage.

There happened to be a great Temperance Convention held here on the 
day after our arrival; and as the order of march brought the 
procession under the windows of the hotel in which we lodged, when 
they started in the morning, I had a good opportunity of seeing it.  
It comprised several thousand men; the members of various 
'Washington Auxiliary Temperance Societies;' and was marshalled by 
officers on horseback, who cantered briskly up and down the line, 
with scarves and ribbons of bright colours fluttering out behind 
them gaily.  There were bands of music too, and banners out of 
number:  and it was a fresh, holiday-looking concourse altogether.

I was particularly pleased to see the Irishmen, who formed a 
distinct society among themselves, and mustered very strong with 
their green scarves; carrying their national Harp and their 
Portrait of Father Mathew, high above the people's heads.  They 
looked as jolly and good-humoured as ever; and, working (here) the 
hardest for their living and doing any kind of sturdy labour that 
came in their way, were the most independent fellows there, I 
thought.

The banners were very well painted, and flaunted down the street 
famously.  There was the smiting of the rock, and the gushing forth 
of the waters; and there was a temperate man with 'considerable of 
a hatchet' (as the standard-bearer would probably have said), 
aiming a deadly blow at a serpent which was apparently about to 
spring upon him from the top of a barrel of spirits.  But the chief 
feature of this part of the show was a huge allegorical device, 
borne among the ship-carpenters, on one side whereof the steamboat 
Alcohol was represented bursting her boiler and exploding with a 
great crash, while upon the other, the good ship Temperance sailed 
away with a fair wind, to the heart's content of the captain, crew, 
and passengers.

After going round the town, the procession repaired to a certain 
appointed place, where, as the printed programme set forth, it 
would be received by the children of the different free schools, 
'singing Temperance Songs.'  I was prevented from getting there, in 
time to hear these Little Warblers, or to report upon this novel 
kind of vocal entertainment:  novel, at least, to me:  but I found 
in a large open space, each society gathered round its own banners, 
and listening in silent attention to its own orator.  The speeches, 
judging from the little I could hear of them, were certainly 
adapted to the occasion, as having that degree of relationship to 
cold water which wet blankets may claim:  but the main thing was 
the conduct and appearance of the audience throughout the day; and 
that was admirable and full of promise.

Cincinnati is honourably famous for its free schools, of which it 
has so many that no person's child among its population can, by 
possibility, want the means of education, which are extended, upon 
an average, to four thousand pupils, annually.  I was only present 
in one of these establishments during the hours of instruction.  In 
the boys' department, which was full of little urchins (varying in 
their ages, I should say, from six years old to ten or twelve), the 
master offered to institute an extemporary examination of the 
pupils in algebra; a proposal, which, as I was by no means 
confident of my ability to detect mistakes in that science, I 
declined with some alarm.  In the girls' school, reading was 
proposed; and as I felt tolerably equal to that art, I expressed my 
willingness to hear a class.  Books were distributed accordingly, 
and some half-dozen girls relieved each other in reading paragraphs 
from English History.  But it seemed to be a dry compilation, 
infinitely above their powers; and when they had blundered through 
three or four dreary passages concerning the Treaty of Amiens, and 
other thrilling topics of the same nature (obviously without 
comprehending ten words), I expressed myself quite satisfied.  It 
is very possible that they only mounted to this exalted stave in 
the Ladder of Learning for the astonishment of a visitor; and that 
at other times they keep upon its lower rounds; but I should have 
been much better pleased and satisfied if I had heard them 
exercised in simpler lessons, which they understood.

As in every other place I visited, the judges here were gentlemen 
of high character and attainments.  I was in one of the courts for 
a few minutes, and found it like those to which I have already 
referred.  A nuisance cause was trying; there were not many 
spectators; and the witnesses, counsel, and jury, formed a sort of 
family circle, sufficiently jocose and snug.

The society with which I mingled, was intelligent, courteous, and 
agreeable.  The inhabitants of Cincinnati are proud of their city 
as one of the most interesting in America:  and with good reason:  
for beautiful and thriving as it is now, and containing, as it 
does, a population of fifty thousand souls, but two-and-fifty years 
have passed away since the ground on which it stands (bought at 
that time for a few dollars) was a wild wood, and its citizens were 
but a handful of dwellers in scattered log huts upon the river's 
shore.



CHAPTER XII - FROM CINCINNATI TO LOUISVILLE IN ANOTHER WESTERN 
STEAMBOAT; AND FROM LOUISVILLE TO ST. LOUIS IN ANOTHER.  ST. LOUIS



LEAVING Cincinnati at eleven o'clock in the forenoon, we embarked 
for Louisville in the Pike steamboat, which, carrying the mails, 
was a packet of a much better class than that in which we had come 
from Pittsburg.  As this passage does not occupy more than twelve 
or thirteen hours, we arranged to go ashore that night:  not 
coveting the distinction of sleeping in a state-room, when it was 
possible to sleep anywhere else.

There chanced to be on board this boat, in addition to the usual 
dreary crowd of passengers, one Pitchlynn, a chief of the Choctaw 
tribe of Indians, who SENT IN HIS CARD to me, and with whom I had 
the pleasure of a long conversation.

He spoke English perfectly well, though he had not begun to learn 
the language, he told me, until he was a young man grown.  He had 
read many books; and Scott's poetry appeared to have left a strong 
impression on his mind:  especially the opening of The Lady of the 
Lake, and the great battle scene in Marmion, in which, no doubt 
from the congeniality of the subjects to his own pursuits and 
tastes, he had great interest and delight.  He appeared to 
understand correctly all he had read; and whatever fiction had 
enlisted his sympathy in its belief, had done so keenly and 
earnestly.  I might almost say fiercely.  He was dressed in our 
ordinary everyday costume, which hung about his fine figure 
loosely, and with indifferent grace.  On my telling him that I 
regretted not to see him in his own attire, he threw up his right 
arm, for a moment, as though he were brandishing some heavy weapon, 
and answered, as he let it fall again, that his race were losing 
many things besides their dress, and would soon be seen upon the 
earth no more:  but he wore it at home, he added proudly.

He told me that he had been away from his home, west of the 
Mississippi, seventeen months:  and was now returning.  He had been 
chiefly at Washington on some negotiations pending between his 
Tribe and the Government:  which were not settled yet (he said in a 
melancholy way), and he feared never would be:  for what could a 
few poor Indians do, against such well-skilled men of business as 
the whites?  He had no love for Washington; tired of towns and 
cities very soon; and longed for the Forest and the Prairie.

I asked him what he thought of Congress?  He answered, with a 
smile, that it wanted dignity, in an Indian's eyes.

He would very much like, he said, to see England before he died; 
and spoke with much interest about the great things to be seen 
there.  When I told him of that chamber in the British Museum 
wherein are preserved household memorials of a race that ceased to 
be, thousands of years ago, he was very attentive, and it was not 
hard to see that he had a reference in his mind to the gradual 
fading away of his own people.

This led us to speak of Mr. Catlin's gallery, which he praised 
highly:  observing that his own portrait was among the collection, 
and that all the likenesses were 'elegant.'  Mr. Cooper, he said, 
had painted the Red Man well; and so would I, he knew, if I would 
go home with him and hunt buffaloes, which he was quite anxious I 
should do.  When I told him that supposing I went, I should not be 
very likely to damage the buffaloes much, he took it as a great 
joke and laughed heartily.

He was a remarkably handsome man; some years past forty, I should 
judge; with long black hair, an aquiline nose, broad cheek-bones, a 
sunburnt complexion, and a very bright, keen, dark, and piercing 
eye.  There were but twenty thousand of the Choctaws left, he said, 
and their number was decreasing every day.  A few of his brother 
chiefs had been obliged to become civilised, and to make themselves 
acquainted with what the whites knew, for it was their only chance 
of existence.  But they were not many; and the rest were as they 
always had been.  He dwelt on this:  and said several times that 
unless they tried to assimilate themselves to their conquerors, 
they must be swept away before the strides of civilised society.

When we shook hands at parting, I told him he must come to England, 
as he longed to see the land so much:  that I should hope to see 
him there, one day:  and that I could promise him he would be well 
received and kindly treated.  He was evidently pleased by this 
assurance, though he rejoined with a good-humoured smile and an 
arch shake of his head, that the English used to be very fond of 
the Red Men when they wanted their help, but had not cared much for 
them, since.

He took his leave; as stately and complete a gentleman of Nature's 
making, as ever I beheld; and moved among the people in the boat, 
another kind of being.  He sent me a lithographed portrait of 
himself soon afterwards; very like, though scarcely handsome 
enough; which I have carefully preserved in memory of our brief 
acquaintance.

There was nothing very interesting in the scenery of this day's 
journey, which brought us at midnight to Louisville.  We slept at 
the Galt House; a splendid hotel; and were as handsomely lodged as 
though we had been in Paris, rather than hundreds of miles beyond 
the Alleghanies.

The city presenting no objects of sufficient interest to detain us 
on our way, we resolved to proceed next day by another steamboat, 
the Fulton, and to join it, about noon, at a suburb called 
Portland, where it would be delayed some time in passing through a 
canal.

The interval, after breakfast, we devoted to riding through the 
town, which is regular and cheerful:  the streets being laid out at 
right angles, and planted with young trees.  The buildings are 
smoky and blackened, from the use of bituminous coal, but an 
Englishman is well used to that appearance, and indisposed to 
quarrel with it.  There did not appear to be much business 
stirring; and some unfinished buildings and improvements seemed to 
intimate that the city had been overbuilt in the ardour of 'going-
a-head,' and was suffering under the re-action consequent upon such 
feverish forcing of its powers.

On our way to Portland, we passed a 'Magistrate's office,' which 
amused me, as looking far more like a dame school than any police 
establishment:  for this awful Institution was nothing but a little 
lazy, good-for-nothing front parlour, open to the street; wherein 
two or three figures (I presume the magistrate and his myrmidons) 
were basking in the sunshine, the very effigies of languor and 
repose.  It was a perfect picture of justice retired from business 
for want of customers; her sword and scales sold off; napping 
comfortably with her legs upon the table.

Here, as elsewhere in these parts, the road was perfectly alive 
with pigs of all ages; lying about in every direction, fast 
asleep.; or grunting along in quest of hidden dainties.  I had 
always a sneaking kindness for these odd animals, and found a 
constant source of amusement, when all others failed, in watching 
their proceedings.  As we were riding along this morning, I 
observed a little incident between two youthful pigs, which was so 
very human as to be inexpressibly comical and grotesque at the 
time, though I dare say, in telling, it is tame enough.

One young gentleman (a very delicate porker with several straws 
sticking about his nose, betokening recent investigations in a 
dung-hill) was walking deliberately on, profoundly thinking, when 
suddenly his brother, who was lying in a miry hole unseen by him, 
rose up immediately before his startled eyes, ghostly with damp 
mud.  Never was pig's whole mass of blood so turned.  He started 
back at least three feet, gazed for a moment, and then shot off as 
hard as he could go:  his excessively little tail vibrating with 
speed and terror like a distracted pendulum.  But before he had 
gone very far, he began to reason with himself as to the nature of 
this frightful appearance; and as he reasoned, he relaxed his speed 
by gradual degrees; until at last he stopped, and faced about.  
There was his brother, with the mud upon him glazing in the sun, 
yet staring out of the very same hole, perfectly amazed at his 
proceedings!  He was no sooner assured of this; and he assured 
himself so carefully that one may almost say he shaded his eyes 
with his hand to see the better; than he came back at a round trot, 
pounced upon him, and summarily took off a piece of his tail; as a 
caution to him to be careful what he was about for the future, and 
never to play tricks with his family any more.

We found the steamboat in the canal, waiting for the slow process 
of getting through the lock, and went on board, where we shortly 
afterwards had a new kind of visitor in the person of a certain 
Kentucky Giant whose name is Porter, and who is of the moderate 
height of seven feet eight inches, in his stockings.

There never was a race of people who so completely gave the lie to 
history as these giants, or whom all the chroniclers have so 
cruelly libelled.  Instead of roaring and ravaging about the world, 
constantly catering for their cannibal larders, and perpetually 
going to market in an unlawful manner, they are the meekest people 
in any man's acquaintance:  rather inclining to milk and vegetable 
diet, and bearing anything for a quiet life.  So decidedly are 
amiability and mildness their characteristics, that I confess I 
look upon that youth who distinguished himself by the slaughter of 
these inoffensive persons, as a false-hearted brigand, who, 
pretending to philanthropic motives, was secretly influenced only 
by the wealth stored up within their castles, and the hope of 
plunder.  And I lean the more to this opinion from finding that 
even the historian of those exploits, with all his partiality for 
his hero, is fain to admit that the slaughtered monsters in 
question were of a very innocent and simple turn; extremely 
guileless and ready of belief; lending a credulous ear to the most 
improbable tales; suffering themselves to be easily entrapped into 
pits; and even (as in the case of the Welsh Giant) with an excess 
of the hospitable politeness of a landlord, ripping themselves 
open, rather than hint at the possibility of their guests being 
versed in the vagabond arts of sleight-of-hand and hocus-pocus.

The Kentucky Giant was but another illustration of the truth of 
this position.  He had a weakness in the region of the knees, and a 
trustfulness in his long face, which appealed even to five-feet 
nine for encouragement and support.  He was only twenty-five years 
old, he said, and had grown recently, for it had been found 
necessary to make an addition to the legs of his inexpressibles.  
At fifteen he was a short boy, and in those days his English father 
and his Irish mother had rather snubbed him, as being too small of 
stature to sustain the credit of the family.  He added that his 
health had not been good, though it was better now; but short 
people are not wanting who whisper that he drinks too hard.

I understand he drives a hackney-coach, though how he does it, 
unless he stands on the footboard behind, and lies along the roof 
upon his chest, with his chin in the box, it would be difficult to 
comprehend.  He brought his gun with him, as a curiosity.

Christened 'The Little Rifle,' and displayed outside a shop-window, 
it would make the fortune of any retail business in Holborn.  When 
he had shown himself and talked a little while, he withdrew with 
his pocket-instrument, and went bobbing down the cabin, among men 
of six feet high and upwards, like a light-house walking among 
lamp-posts.

Within a few minutes afterwards, we were out of the canal, and in 
the Ohio river again.

The arrangements of the boat were like those of the Messenger, and 
the passengers were of the same order of people.  We fed at the 
same times, on the same kind of viands, in the same dull manner, 
and with the same observances.  The company appeared to be 
oppressed by the same tremendous concealments, and had as little 
capacity of enjoyment or light-heartedness.  I never in my life did 
see such listless, heavy dulness as brooded over these meals:  the 
very recollection of it weighs me down, and makes me, for the 
moment, wretched.  Reading and writing on my knee, in our little 
cabin, I really dreaded the coming of the hour that summoned us to 
table; and was as glad to escape from it again, as if it had been a 
penance or a punishment.  Healthy cheerfulness and good spirits 
forming a part of the banquet, I could soak my crusts in the 
fountain with Le Sage's strolling player, and revel in their glad 
enjoyment:  but sitting down with so many fellow-animals to ward 
off thirst and hunger as a business; to empty, each creature, his 
Yahoo's trough as quickly as he can, and then slink sullenly away; 
to have these social sacraments stripped of everything but the mere 
greedy satisfaction of the natural cravings; goes so against the 
grain with me, that I seriously believe the recollection of these 
funeral feasts will be a waking nightmare to me all my life.

There was some relief in this boat, too, which there had not been 
in the other, for the captain (a blunt, good-natured fellow) had 
his handsome wife with him, who was disposed to be lively and 
agreeable, as were a few other lady-passengers who had their seats 
about us at the same end of the table.  But nothing could have made 
head against the depressing influence of the general body.  There 
was a magnetism of dulness in them which would have beaten down the 
most facetious companion that the earth ever knew.  A jest would 
have been a crime, and a smile would have faded into a grinning 
horror.  Such deadly, leaden people; such systematic plodding, 
weary, insupportable heaviness; such a mass of animated indigestion 
in respect of all that was genial, jovial, frank, social, or 
hearty; never, sure, was brought together elsewhere since the world 
began.

Nor was the scenery, as we approached the junction of the Ohio and 
Mississippi rivers, at all inspiriting in its influence.  The trees 
were stunted in their growth; the banks were low and flat; the 
settlements and log cabins fewer in number:  their inhabitants more 
wan and wretched than any we had encountered yet.  No songs of 
birds were in the air, no pleasant scents, no moving lights and 
shadows from swift passing clouds.  Hour after hour, the changeless 
glare of the hot, unwinking sky, shone upon the same monotonous 
objects.  Hour after hour, the river rolled along, as wearily and 
slowly as the time itself.

At length, upon the morning of the third day, we arrived at a spot 
so much more desolate than any we had yet beheld, that the 
forlornest places we had passed, were, in comparison with it, full 
of interest.  At the junction of the two rivers, on ground so flat 
and low and marshy, that at certain seasons of the year it is 
inundated to the house-tops, lies a breeding-place of fever, ague, 
and death; vaunted in England as a mine of Golden Hope, and 
speculated in, on the faith of monstrous representations, to many 
people's ruin.  A dismal swamp, on which the half-built houses rot 
away:  cleared here and there for the space of a few yards; and 
teeming, then, with rank unwholesome vegetation, in whose baleful 
shade the wretched wanderers who are tempted hither, droop, and 
die, and lay their bones; the hateful Mississippi circling and 
eddying before it, and turning off upon its southern course a slimy 
monster hideous to behold; a hotbed of disease, an ugly sepulchre, 
a grave uncheered by any gleam of promise:  a place without one 
single quality, in earth or air or water, to commend it:  such is 
this dismal Cairo.

But what words shall describe the Mississippi, great father of 
rivers, who (praise be to Heaven) has no young children like him!  
An enormous ditch, sometimes two or three miles wide, running 
liquid mud, six miles an hour:  its strong and frothy current 
choked and obstructed everywhere by huge logs and whole forest 
trees:  now twining themselves together in great rafts, from the 
interstices of which a sedgy, lazy foam works up, to float upon the 
water's top; now rolling past like monstrous bodies, their tangled 
roots showing like matted hair; now glancing singly by like giant 
leeches; and now writhing round and round in the vortex of some 
small whirlpool, like wounded snakes.  The banks low, the trees 
dwarfish, the marshes swarming with frogs, the wretched cabins few 
and far apart, their inmates hollow-cheeked and pale, the weather 
very hot, mosquitoes penetrating into every crack and crevice of 
the boat, mud and slime on everything:  nothing pleasant in its 
aspect, but the harmless lightning which flickers every night upon 
the dark horizon.

For two days we toiled up this foul stream, striking constantly 
against the floating timber, or stopping to avoid those more 
dangerous obstacles, the snags, or sawyers, which are the hidden 
trunks of trees that have their roots below the tide.  When the 
nights are very dark, the look-out stationed in the head of the 
boat, knows by the ripple of the water if any great impediment be 
near at hand, and rings a bell beside him, which is the signal for 
the engine to be stopped:  but always in the night this bell has 
work to do, and after every ring, there comes a blow which renders 
it no easy matter to remain in bed.

The decline of day here was very gorgeous; tingeing the firmament 
deeply with red and gold, up to the very keystone of the arch above 
us.  As the sun went down behind the bank, the slightest blades of 
grass upon it seemed to become as distinctly visible as the 
arteries in the skeleton of a leaf; and when, as it slowly sank, 
the red and golden bars upon the water grew dimmer, and dimmer yet, 
as if they were sinking too; and all the glowing colours of 
departing day paled, inch by inch, before the sombre night; the 
scene became a thousand times more lonesome and more dreary than 
before, and all its influences darkened with the sky.

We drank the muddy water of this river while we were upon it.  It 
is considered wholesome by the natives, and is something more 
opaque than gruel.  I have seen water like it at the Filter-shops, 
but nowhere else.

On the fourth night after leaving Louisville, we reached St. Louis, 
and here I witnessed the conclusion of an incident, trifling enough 
in itself, but very pleasant to see, which had interested me during 
the whole journey.

There was a little woman on board, with a little baby; and both 
little woman and little child were cheerful, good-looking, bright-
eyed, and fair to see.  The little woman had been passing a long 
time with her sick mother in New York, and had left her home in St. 
Louis, in that condition in which ladies who truly love their lords 
desire to be.  The baby was born in her mother's house; and she had 
not seen her husband (to whom she was now returning), for twelve 
months:  having left him a month or two after their marriage.

Well, to be sure, there never was a little woman so full of hope, 
and tenderness, and love, and anxiety, as this little woman was:  
and all day long she wondered whether 'He' would be at the wharf; 
and whether 'He' had got her letter; and whether, if she sent the 
baby ashore by somebody else, 'He' would know it, meeting it in the 
street:  which, seeing that he had never set eyes upon it in his 
life, was not very likely in the abstract, but was probable enough, 
to the young mother.  She was such an artless little creature; and 
was in such a sunny, beaming, hopeful state; and let out all this 
matter clinging close about her heart, so freely; that all the 
other lady passengers entered into the spirit of it as much as she; 
and the captain (who heard all about it from his wife) was wondrous 
sly, I promise you:  inquiring, every time we met at table, as in 
forgetfulness, whether she expected anybody to meet her at St. 
Louis, and whether she would want to go ashore the night we reached 
it (but he supposed she wouldn't), and cutting many other dry jokes 
of that nature.  There was one little weazen, dried-apple-faced old 
woman, who took occasion to doubt the constancy of husbands in such 
circumstances of bereavement; and there was another lady (with a 
lap-dog) old enough to moralize on the lightness of human 
affections, and yet not so old that she could help nursing the 
baby, now and then, or laughing with the rest, when the little 
woman called it by its father's name, and asked it all manner of 
fantastic questions concerning him in the joy of her heart.

It was something of a blow to the little woman, that when we were 
within twenty miles of our destination, it became clearly necessary 
to put this baby to bed.  But she got over it with the same good 
humour; tied a handkerchief round her head; and came out into the 
little gallery with the rest.  Then, such an oracle as she became 
in reference to the localities! and such facetiousness as was 
displayed by the married ladies! and such sympathy as was shown by 
the single ones! and such peals of laughter as the little woman 
herself (who would just as soon have cried) greeted every jest 
with!

At last, there were the lights of St. Louis, and here was the 
wharf, and those were the steps:  and the little woman covering her 
face with her hands, and laughing (or seeming to laugh) more than 
ever, ran into her own cabin, and shut herself up.  I have no doubt 
that in the charming inconsistency of such excitement, she stopped 
her ears, lest she should hear 'Him' asking for her:  but I did not 
see her do it.

Then, a great crowd of people rushed on board, though the boat was 
not yet made fast, but was wandering about, among the other boats, 
to find a landing-place:  and everybody looked for the husband:  
and nobody saw him:  when, in the midst of us all - Heaven knows 
how she ever got there - there was the little woman clinging with 
both arms tight round the neck of a fine, good-looking, sturdy 
young fellow! and in a moment afterwards, there she was again, 
actually clapping her little hands for joy, as she dragged him 
through the small door of her small cabin, to look at the baby as 
he lay asleep!

We went to a large hotel, called the Planter's House:  built like 
an English hospital, with long passages and bare walls, and sky-
lights above the room-doors for the free circulation of air.  There 
were a great many boarders in it; and as many lights sparkled and 
glistened from the windows down into the street below, when we 
drove up, as if it had been illuminated on some occasion of 
rejoicing.  It is an excellent house, and the proprietors have most 
bountiful notions of providing the creature comforts.  Dining alone 
with my wife in our own room, one day, I counted fourteen dishes on 
the table at once.

In the old French portion of the town, the thoroughfares are narrow 
and crooked, and some of the houses are very quaint and 
picturesque:  being built of wood, with tumble-down galleries 
before the windows, approachable by stairs or rather ladders from 
the street.  There are queer little barbers' shops and drinking-
houses too, in this quarter; and abundance of crazy old tenements 
with blinking casements, such as may be seen in Flanders.  Some of 
these ancient habitations, with high garret gable-windows perking 
into the roofs, have a kind of French shrug about them; and being 
lop-sided with age, appear to hold their heads askew, besides, as 
if they were grimacing in astonishment at the American 
Improvements.

It is hardly necessary to say, that these consist of wharfs and 
warehouses, and new buildings in all directions; and of a great 
many vast plans which are still 'progressing.'  Already, however, 
some very good houses, broad streets, and marble-fronted shops, 
have gone so far ahead as to be in a state of completion; and the 
town bids fair in a few years to improve considerably:  though it 
is not likely ever to vie, in point of elegance or beauty, with 
Cincinnati.

The Roman Catholic religion, introduced here by the early French 
settlers, prevails extensively.  Among the public institutions are 
a Jesuit college; a convent for 'the Ladies of the Sacred Heart;' 
and a large chapel attached to the college, which was in course of 
erection at the time of my visit, and was intended to be 
consecrated on the second of December in the next year.  The 
architect of this building, is one of the reverend fathers of the 
school, and the works proceed under his sole direction.  The organ 
will be sent from Belgium.

In addition to these establishments, there is a Roman Catholic 
cathedral, dedicated to Saint Francis Xavier; and a hospital, 
founded by the munificence of a deceased resident, who was a member 
of that church.  It also sends missionaries from hence among the 
Indian tribes.

The Unitarian church is represented, in this remote place, as in 
most other parts of America, by a gentleman of great worth and 
excellence.  The poor have good reason to remember and bless it; 
for it befriends them, and aids the cause of rational education, 
without any sectarian or selfish views.  It is liberal in all its 
actions; of kind construction; and of wide benevolence.

There are three free-schools already erected, and in full operation 
in this city.  A fourth is building, and will soon be opened.

No man ever admits the unhealthiness of the place he dwells in 
(unless he is going away from it), and I shall therefore, I have no 
doubt, be at issue with the inhabitants of St. Louis, in 
questioning the perfect salubrity of its climate, and in hinting 
that I think it must rather dispose to fever, in the summer and 
autumnal seasons.  Just adding, that it is very hot, lies among 
great rivers, and has vast tracts of undrained swampy land around 
it, I leave the reader to form his own opinion.

As I had a great desire to see a Prairie before turning back from 
the furthest point of my wanderings; and as some gentlemen of the 
town had, in their hospitable consideration, an equal desire to 
gratify me; a day was fixed, before my departure, for an expedition 
to the Looking-Glass Prairie, which is within thirty miles of the 
town.  Deeming it possible that my readers may not object to know 
what kind of thing such a gipsy party may be at that distance from 
home, and among what sort of objects it moves, I will describe the 
jaunt in another chapter.



CHAPTER XIII - A JAUNT TO THE LOOKING-GLASS PRAIRIE AND BACK



I MAY premise that the word Prairie is variously pronounced 
PARAAER, PAREARER, PAROARER.  The latter mode of pronunciation is 
perhaps the most in favour.

We were fourteen in all, and all young men:  indeed it is a 
singular though very natural feature in the society of these 
distant settlements, that it is mainly composed of adventurous 
persons in the prime of life, and has very few grey heads among it.  
There were no ladies:  the trip being a fatiguing one:  and we were 
to start at five o'clock in the morning punctually.

I was called at four, that I might be certain of keeping nobody 
waiting; and having got some bread and milk for breakfast, threw up 
the window and looked down into the street, expecting to see the 
whole party busily astir, and great preparations going on below.  
But as everything was very quiet, and the street presented that 
hopeless aspect with which five o'clock in the morning is familiar 
elsewhere, I deemed it as well to go to bed again, and went 
accordingly.

I woke again at seven o'clock, and by that time the party had 
assembled, and were gathered round, one light carriage, with a very 
stout axletree; one something on wheels like an amateur carrier's 
cart; one double phaeton of great antiquity and unearthly 
construction; one gig with a great hole in its back and a broken 
head; and one rider on horseback who was to go on before.  I got 
into the first coach with three companions; the rest bestowed 
themselves in the other vehicles; two large baskets were made fast 
to the lightest; two large stone jars in wicker cases, technically 
known as demi-johns, were consigned to the 'least rowdy' of the 
party for safe-keeping; and the procession moved off to the 
ferryboat, in which it was to cross the river bodily, men, horses, 
carriages, and all, as the manner in these parts is.

We got over the river in due course, and mustered again before a 
little wooden box on wheels, hove down all aslant in a morass, with 
'MERCHANT TAILOR' painted in very large letters over the door.  
Having settled the order of proceeding, and the road to be taken, 
we started off once more and began to make our way through an ill-
favoured Black Hollow, called, less expressively, the American 
Bottom.

The previous day had been - not to say hot, for the term is weak 
and lukewarm in its power of conveying an idea of the temperature.  
The town had been on fire; in a blaze.  But at night it had come on 
to rain in torrents, and all night long it had rained without 
cessation.  We had a pair of very strong horses, but travelled at 
the rate of little more than a couple of miles an hour, through one 
unbroken slough of black mud and water.  It had no variety but in 
depth.  Now it was only half over the wheels, now it hid the 
axletree, and now the coach sank down in it almost to the windows.  
The air resounded in all directions with the loud chirping of the 
frogs, who, with the pigs (a coarse, ugly breed, as unwholesome-
looking as though they were the spontaneous growth of the country), 
had the whole scene to themselves.  Here and there we passed a log 
hut:  but the wretched cabins were wide apart and thinly scattered, 
for though the soil is very rich in this place, few people can 
exist in such a deadly atmosphere.  On either side of the track, if 
it deserve the name, was the thick 'bush;' and everywhere was 
stagnant, slimy, rotten, filthy water.

As it is the custom in these parts to give a horse a gallon or so 
of cold water whenever he is in a foam with heat, we halted for 
that purpose, at a log inn in the wood, far removed from any other 
residence.  It consisted of one room, bare-roofed and bare-walled 
of course, with a loft above.  The ministering priest was a swarthy 
young savage, in a shirt of cotton print like bed-furniture, and a 
pair of ragged trousers.  There were a couple of young boys, too, 
nearly naked, lying idle by the well; and they, and he, and THE 
traveller at the inn, turned out to look at us.

The traveller was an old man with a grey gristly beard two inches 
long, a shaggy moustache of the same hue, and enormous eyebrows; 
which almost obscured his lazy, semi-drunken glance, as he stood 
regarding us with folded arms:  poising himself alternately upon 
his toes and heels.  On being addressed by one of the party, he 
drew nearer, and said, rubbing his chin (which scraped under his 
horny hand like fresh gravel beneath a nailed shoe), that he was 
from Delaware, and had lately bought a farm 'down there,' pointing 
into one of the marshes where the stunted trees were thickest.  He 
was 'going,' he added, to St. Louis, to fetch his family, whom he 
had left behind; but he seemed in no great hurry to bring on these 
incumbrances, for when we moved away, he loitered back into the 
cabin, and was plainly bent on stopping there so long as his money 
lasted.  He was a great politician of course, and explained his 
opinions at some length to one of our company; but I only remember 
that he concluded with two sentiments, one of which was, Somebody 
for ever; and the other, Blast everybody else! which is by no means 
a bad abstract of the general creed in these matters.

When the horses were swollen out to about twice their natural 
dimensions (there seems to be an idea here, that this kind of 
inflation improves their going), we went forward again, through mud 
and mire, and damp, and festering heat, and brake and bush, 
attended always by the music of the frogs and pigs, until nearly 
noon, when we halted at a place called Belleville.

Belleville was a small collection of wooden houses, huddled 
together in the very heart of the bush and swamp.  Many of them had 
singularly bright doors of red and yellow; for the place had been 
lately visited by a travelling painter, 'who got along,' as I was 
told, 'by eating his way.'  The criminal court was sitting, and was 
at that moment trying some criminals for horse-stealing:  with whom 
it would most likely go hard:  for live stock of all kinds being 
necessarily very much exposed in the woods, is held by the 
community in rather higher value than human life; and for this 
reason, juries generally make a point of finding all men indicted 
for cattle-stealing, guilty, whether or no.

The horses belonging to the bar, the judge, and witnesses, were 
tied to temporary racks set up roughly in the road; by which is to 
be understood, a forest path, nearly knee-deep in mud and slime.

There was an hotel in this place, which, like all hotels in 
America, had its large dining-room for the public table.  It was an 
odd, shambling, low-roofed out-house, half-cowshed and half-
kitchen, with a coarse brown canvas table-cloth, and tin sconces 
stuck against the walls, to hold candles at supper-time.  The 
horseman had gone forward to have coffee and some eatables 
prepared, and they were by this time nearly ready.  He had ordered 
'wheat-bread and chicken fixings,' in preference to 'corn-bread and 
common doings.'  The latter kind of rejection includes only pork 
and bacon.  The former comprehends broiled ham, sausages, veal 
cutlets, steaks, and such other viands of that nature as may be 
supposed, by a tolerably wide poetical construction, 'to fix' a 
chicken comfortably in the digestive organs of any lady or 
gentleman.

On one of the door-posts at this inn, was a tin plate, whereon was 
inscribed in characters of gold, 'Doctor Crocus;' and on a sheet of 
paper, pasted up by the side of this plate, was a written 
announcement that Dr. Crocus would that evening deliver a lecture 
on Phrenology for the benefit of the Belleville public; at a 
charge, for admission, of so much a head.

Straying up-stairs, during the preparation of the chicken fixings, 
I happened to pass the doctor's chamber; and as the door stood wide 
open, and the room was empty, I made bold to peep in.

It was a bare, unfurnished, comfortless room, with an unframed 
portrait hanging up at the head of the bed; a likeness, I take it, 
of the Doctor, for the forehead was fully displayed, and great 
stress was laid by the artist upon its phrenological developments.  
The bed itself was covered with an old patch-work counterpane.  The 
room was destitute of carpet or of curtain.  There was a damp 
fireplace without any stove, full of wood ashes; a chair, and a 
very small table; and on the last-named piece of furniture was 
displayed, in grand array, the doctor's library, consisting of some 
half-dozen greasy old books.

Now, it certainly looked about the last apartment on the whole 
earth out of which any man would be likely to get anything to do 
him good.  But the door, as I have said, stood coaxingly open, and 
plainly said in conjunction with the chair, the portrait, the 
table, and the books, 'Walk in, gentlemen, walk in!  Don't be ill, 
gentlemen, when you may be well in no time.  Doctor Crocus is here, 
gentlemen, the celebrated Dr. Crocus!  Dr. Crocus has come all this 
way to cure you, gentlemen.  If you haven't heard of Dr. Crocus, 
it's your fault, gentlemen, who live a little way out of the world 
here:  not Dr. Crocus's.  Walk in, gentlemen, walk in!'

In the passage below, when I went down-stairs again, was Dr. Crocus 
himself.  A crowd had flocked in from the Court House, and a voice 
from among them called out to the landlord, 'Colonel! introduce 
Doctor Crocus.'

'Mr. Dickens,' says the colonel, 'Doctor Crocus.'

Upon which Doctor Crocus, who is a tall, fine-looking Scotchman, 
but rather fierce and warlike in appearance for a professor of the 
peaceful art of healing, bursts out of the concourse with his right 
arm extended, and his chest thrown out as far as it will possibly 
come, and says:

'Your countryman, sir!'

Whereupon Doctor Crocus and I shake hands; and Doctor Crocus looks 
as if I didn't by any means realise his expectations, which, in a 
linen blouse, and a great straw hat, with a green ribbon, and no 
gloves, and my face and nose profusely ornamented with the stings 
of mosquitoes and the bites of bugs, it is very likely I did not.

'Long in these parts, sir?' says I.

'Three or four months, sir,' says the Doctor.

'Do you think of soon returning to the old country?' says I.

Doctor Crocus makes no verbal answer, but gives me an imploring 
look, which says so plainly 'Will you ask me that again, a little 
louder, if you please?' that I repeat the question.

'Think of soon returning to the old country, sir!' repeats the 
Doctor.

'To the old country, sir,' I rejoin.

Doctor Crocus looks round upon the crowd to observe the effect he 
produces, rubs his hands, and says, in a very loud voice:

'Not yet awhile, sir, not yet.  You won't catch me at that just 
yet, sir.  I am a little too fond of freedom for THAT, sir.  Ha, 
ha!  It's not so easy for a man to tear himself from a free country 
such as this is, sir.  Ha, ha!  No, no!  Ha, ha!  None of that till 
one's obliged to do it, sir.  No, no!'

As Doctor Crocus says these latter words, he shakes his head, 
knowingly, and laughs again.  Many of the bystanders shake their 
heads in concert with the doctor, and laugh too, and look at each 
other as much as to say, 'A pretty bright and first-rate sort of 
chap is Crocus!' and unless I am very much mistaken, a good many 
people went to the lecture that night, who never thought about 
phrenology, or about Doctor Crocus either, in all their lives 
before.

From Belleville, we went on, through the same desolate kind of 
waste, and constantly attended, without the interval of a moment, 
by the same music; until, at three o'clock in the afternoon, we 
halted once more at a village called Lebanon to inflate the horses 
again, and give them some corn besides:  of which they stood much 
in need.  Pending this ceremony, I walked into the village, where I 
met a full-sized dwelling-house coming down-hill at a round trot, 
drawn by a score or more of oxen.

The public-house was so very clean and good a one, that the 
managers of the jaunt resolved to return to it and put up there for 
the night, if possible.  This course decided on, and the horses 
being well refreshed, we again pushed forward, and came upon the 
Prairie at sunset.

It would be difficult to say why, or how - though it was possibly 
from having heard and read so much about it - but the effect on me 
was disappointment.  Looking towards the setting sun, there lay, 
stretched out before my view, a vast expanse of level ground; 
unbroken, save by one thin line of trees, which scarcely amounted 
to a scratch upon the great blank; until it met the glowing sky, 
wherein it seemed to dip:  mingling with its rich colours, and 
mellowing in its distant blue.  There it lay, a tranquil sea or 
lake without water, if such a simile be admissible, with the day 
going down upon it:  a few birds wheeling here and there:  and 
solitude and silence reigning paramount around.  But the grass was 
not yet high; there were bare black patches on the ground; and the 
few wild flowers that the eye could see, were poor and scanty.  
Great as the picture was, its very flatness and extent, which left 
nothing to the imagination, tamed it down and cramped its interest.  
I felt little of that sense of freedom and exhilaration which a 
Scottish heath inspires, or even our English downs awaken.  It was 
lonely and wild, but oppressive in its barren monotony.  I felt 
that in traversing the Prairies, I could never abandon myself to 
the scene, forgetful of all else; as I should do instinctively, 
were the heather underneath my feet, or an iron-bound coast beyond; 
but should often glance towards the distant and frequently-receding 
line of the horizon, and wish it gained and passed.  It is not a 
scene to be forgotten, but it is scarcely one, I think (at all 
events, as I saw it), to remember with much pleasure, or to covet 
the looking-on again, in after-life.

We encamped near a solitary log-house, for the sake of its water, 
and dined upon the plain.  The baskets contained roast fowls, 
buffalo's tongue (an exquisite dainty, by the way), ham, bread, 
cheese, and butter; biscuits, champagne, sherry; lemons and sugar 
for punch; and abundance of rough ice.  The meal was delicious, and 
the entertainers were the soul of kindness and good humour.  I have 
often recalled that cheerful party to my pleasant recollection 
since, and shall not easily forget, in junketings nearer home with 
friends of older date, my boon companions on the Prairie.

Returning to Lebanon that night, we lay at the little inn at which 
we had halted in the afternoon.  In point of cleanliness and 
comfort it would have suffered by no comparison with any English 
alehouse, of a homely kind, in England.

Rising at five o'clock next morning, I took a walk about the 
village:  none of the houses were strolling about to-day, but it 
was early for them yet, perhaps:  and then amused myself by 
lounging in a kind of farm-yard behind the tavern, of which the 
leading features were, a strange jumble of rough sheds for stables; 
a rude colonnade, built as a cool place of summer resort; a deep 
well; a great earthen mound for keeping vegetables in, in winter 
time; and a pigeon-house, whose little apertures looked, as they do 
in all pigeon-houses, very much too small for the admission of the 
plump and swelling-breasted birds who were strutting about it, 
though they tried to get in never so hard.  That interest 
exhausted, I took a survey of the inn's two parlours, which were 
decorated with coloured prints of Washington, and President 
Madison, and of a white-faced young lady (much speckled by the 
flies), who held up her gold neck-chain for the admiration of the 
spectator, and informed all admiring comers that she was 'Just 
Seventeen:' although I should have thought her older.  In the best 
room were two oil portraits of the kit-cat size, representing the 
landlord and his infant son; both looking as bold as lions, and 
staring out of the canvas with an intensity that would have been 
cheap at any price.  They were painted, I think, by the artist who 
had touched up the Belleville doors with red and gold; for I seemed 
to recognise his style immediately.

After breakfast, we started to return by a different way from that 
which we had taken yesterday, and coming up at ten o'clock with an 
encampment of German emigrants carrying their goods in carts, who 
had made a rousing fire which they were just quitting, stopped 
there to refresh.  And very pleasant the fire was; for, hot though 
it had been yesterday, it was quite cold to-day, and the wind blew 
keenly.  Looming in the distance, as we rode along, was another of 
the ancient Indian burial-places, called The Monks' Mound; in 
memory of a body of fanatics of the order of La Trappe, who founded 
a desolate convent there, many years ago, when there were no 
settlers within a thousand miles, and were all swept off by the 
pernicious climate:  in which lamentable fatality, few rational 
people will suppose, perhaps, that society experienced any very 
severe deprivation.

The track of to-day had the same features as the track of 
yesterday.  There was the swamp, the bush, and the perpetual chorus 
of frogs, the rank unseemly growth, the unwholesome steaming earth.  
Here and there, and frequently too, we encountered a solitary 
broken-down waggon, full of some new settler's goods.  It was a 
pitiful sight to see one of these vehicles deep in the mire; the 
axle-tree broken; the wheel lying idly by its side; the man gone 
miles away, to look for assistance; the woman seated among their 
wandering household gods with a baby at her breast, a picture of 
forlorn, dejected patience; the team of oxen crouching down 
mournfully in the mud, and breathing forth such clouds of vapour 
from their mouths and nostrils, that all the damp mist and fog 
around seemed to have come direct from them.

In due time we mustered once again before the merchant tailor's, 
and having done so, crossed over to the city in the ferry-boat:  
passing, on the way, a spot called Bloody Island, the duelling-
ground of St. Louis, and so designated in honour of the last fatal 
combat fought there, which was with pistols, breast to breast.  
Both combatants fell dead upon the ground; and possibly some 
rational people may think of them, as of the gloomy madmen on the 
Monks' Mound, that they were no great loss to the community.



CHAPTER XIV - RETURN TO CINCINNATI.  A STAGE-COACH RIDE FROM THAT 
CITY TO COLUMBUS, AND THENCE TO SANDUSKY.  SO, BY LAKE ERIE, TO THE 
FALLS OF NIAGARA



AS I had a desire to travel through the interior of the state of 
Ohio, and to 'strike the lakes,' as the phrase is, at a small town 
called Sandusky, to which that route would conduct us on our way to 
Niagara, we had to return from St. Louis by the way we had come, 
and to retrace our former track as far as Cincinnati.

The day on which we were to take leave of St. Louis being very 
fine; and the steamboat, which was to have started I don't know how 
early in the morning, postponing, for the third or fourth time, her 
departure until the afternoon; we rode forward to an old French 
village on the river, called properly Carondelet, and nicknamed 
Vide Poche, and arranged that the packet should call for us there.

The place consisted of a few poor cottages, and two or three 
public-houses; the state of whose larders certainly seemed to 
justify the second designation of the village, for there was 
nothing to eat in any of them.  At length, however, by going back 
some half a mile or so, we found a solitary house where ham and 
coffee were procurable; and there we tarried to wait the advent of 
the boat, which would come in sight from the green before the door, 
a long way off.

It was a neat, unpretending village tavern, and we took our repast 
in a quaint little room with a bed in it, decorated with some old 
oil paintings, which in their time had probably done duty in a 
Catholic chapel or monastery.  The fare was very good, and served 
with great cleanliness.  The house was kept by a characteristic old 
couple, with whom we had a long talk, and who were perhaps a very 
good sample of that kind of people in the West.

The landlord was a dry, tough, hard-faced old fellow (not so very 
old either, for he was but just turned sixty, I should think), who 
had been out with the militia in the last war with England, and had 
seen all kinds of service, - except a battle; and he had been very 
near seeing that, he added:  very near.  He had all his life been 
restless and locomotive, with an irresistible desire for change; 
and was still the son of his old self:  for if he had nothing to 
keep him at home, he said (slightly jerking his hat and his thumb 
towards the window of the room in which the old lady sat, as we 
stood talking in front of the house), he would clean up his musket, 
and be off to Texas to-morrow morning.  He was one of the very many 
descendants of Cain proper to this continent, who seem destined 
from their birth to serve as pioneers in the great human army:  who 
gladly go on from year to year extending its outposts, and leaving 
home after home behind them; and die at last, utterly regardless of 
their graves being left thousands of miles behind, by the wandering 
generation who succeed.

His wife was a domesticated, kind-hearted old soul, who had come 
with him, 'from the queen city of the world,' which, it seemed, was 
Philadelphia; but had no love for this Western country, and indeed 
had little reason to bear it any; having seen her children, one by 
one, die here of fever, in the full prime and beauty of their 
youth.  Her heart was sore, she said, to think of them; and to talk 
on this theme, even to strangers, in that blighted place, so far 
from her old home, eased it somewhat, and became a melancholy 
pleasure.

The boat appearing towards evening, we bade adieu to the poor old 
lady and her vagrant spouse, and making for the nearest landing-
place, were soon on board The Messenger again, in our old cabin, 
and steaming down the Mississippi.

If the coming up this river, slowly making head against the stream, 
be an irksome journey, the shooting down it with the turbid current 
is almost worse; for then the boat, proceeding at the rate of 
twelve or fifteen miles an hour, has to force its passage through a 
labyrinth of floating logs, which, in the dark, it is often 
impossible to see beforehand or avoid.  All that night, the bell 
was never silent for five minutes at a time; and after every ring 
the vessel reeled again, sometimes beneath a single blow, sometimes 
beneath a dozen dealt in quick succession, the lightest of which 
seemed more than enough to beat in her frail keel, as though it had 
been pie-crust.  Looking down upon the filthy river after dark, it 
seemed to be alive with monsters, as these black masses rolled upon 
the surface, or came starting up again, head first, when the boat, 
in ploughing her way among a shoal of such obstructions, drove a 
few among them for the moment under water.  Sometimes the engine 
stopped during a long interval, and then before her and behind, and 
gathering close about her on all sides, were so many of these ill-
favoured obstacles that she was fairly hemmed in; the centre of a 
floating island; and was constrained to pause until they parted, 
somewhere, as dark clouds will do before the wind, and opened by 
degrees a channel out.

In good time next morning, however, we came again in sight of the 
detestable morass called Cairo; and stopping there to take in wood, 
lay alongside a barge, whose starting timbers scarcely held 
together.  It was moored to the bank, and on its side was painted 
'Coffee House;' that being, I suppose, the floating paradise to 
which the people fly for shelter when they lose their houses for a 
month or two beneath the hideous waters of the Mississippi.  But 
looking southward from this point, we had the satisfaction of 
seeing that intolerable river dragging its slimy length and ugly 
freight abruptly off towards New Orleans; and passing a yellow line 
which stretched across the current, were again upon the clear Ohio, 
never, I trust, to see the Mississippi more, saving in troubled 
dreams and nightmares.  Leaving it for the company of its sparkling 
neighbour, was like the transition from pain to ease, or the 
awakening from a horrible vision to cheerful realities.

We arrived at Louisville on the fourth night, and gladly availed 
ourselves of its excellent hotel.  Next day we went on in the Ben 
Franklin, a beautiful mail steamboat, and reached Cincinnati 
shortly after midnight.  Being by this time nearly tired of 
sleeping upon shelves, we had remained awake to go ashore 
straightway; and groping a passage across the dark decks of other 
boats, and among labyrinths of engine-machinery and leaking casks 
of molasses, we reached the streets, knocked up the porter at the 
hotel where we had stayed before, and were, to our great joy, 
safely housed soon afterwards.

We rested but one day at Cincinnati, and then resumed our journey 
to Sandusky.  As it comprised two varieties of stage-coach 
travelling, which, with those I have already glanced at, comprehend 
the main characteristics of this mode of transit in America, I will 
take the reader as our fellow-passenger, and pledge myself to 
perform the distance with all possible despatch.

Our place of destination in the first instance is Columbus.  It is 
distant about a hundred and twenty miles from Cincinnati, but there 
is a macadamised road (rare blessing!) the whole way, and the rate 
of travelling upon it is six miles an hour.

We start at eight o'clock in the morning, in a great mail-coach, 
whose huge cheeks are so very ruddy and plethoric, that it appears 
to be troubled with a tendency of blood to the head.  Dropsical it 
certainly is, for it will hold a dozen passengers inside.  But, 
wonderful to add, it is very clean and bright, being nearly new; 
and rattles through the streets of Cincinnati gaily.

Our way lies through a beautiful country, richly cultivated, and 
luxuriant in its promise of an abundant harvest.  Sometimes we pass 
a field where the strong bristling stalks of Indian corn look like 
a crop of walking-sticks, and sometimes an enclosure where the 
green wheat is springing up among a labyrinth of stumps; the 
primitive worm-fence is universal, and an ugly thing it is; but the 
farms are neatly kept, and, save for these differences, one might 
be travelling just now in Kent.

We often stop to water at a roadside inn, which is always dull and 
silent.  The coachman dismounts and fills his bucket, and holds it 
to the horses' heads.  There is scarcely ever any one to help him; 
there are seldom any loungers standing round; and never any stable-
company with jokes to crack.  Sometimes, when we have changed our 
team, there is a difficulty in starting again, arising out of the 
prevalent mode of breaking a young horse:  which is to catch him, 
harness him against his will, and put him in a stage-coach without 
further notice:  but we get on somehow or other, after a great many 
kicks and a violent struggle; and jog on as before again.

Occasionally, when we stop to change, some two or three half-
drunken loafers will come loitering out with their hands in their 
pockets, or will be seen kicking their heels in rocking-chairs, or 
lounging on the window-sill, or sitting on a rail within the 
colonnade:  they have not often anything to say though, either to 
us or to each other, but sit there idly staring at the coach and 
horses.  The landlord of the inn is usually among them, and seems, 
of all the party, to be the least connected with the business of 
the house.  Indeed he is with reference to the tavern, what the 
driver is in relation to the coach and passengers:  whatever 
happens in his sphere of action, he is quite indifferent, and 
perfectly easy in his mind.

The frequent change of coachmen works no change or variety in the 
coachman's character.  He is always dirty, sullen, and taciturn.  
If he be capable of smartness of any kind, moral or physical, he 
has a faculty of concealing it which is truly marvellous.  He never 
speaks to you as you sit beside him on the box, and if you speak to 
him, he answers (if at all) in monosyllables.  He points out 
nothing on the road, and seldom looks at anything:  being, to all 
appearance, thoroughly weary of it and of existence generally.  As 
to doing the honours of his coach, his business, as I have said, is 
with the horses.  The coach follows because it is attached to them 
and goes on wheels:  not because you are in it.  Sometimes, towards 
the end of a long stage, he suddenly breaks out into a discordant 
fragment of an election song, but his face never sings along with 
him:  it is only his voice, and not often that.

He always chews and always spits, and never encumbers himself with 
a pocket-handkerchief.  The consequences to the box passenger, 
especially when the wind blows towards him, are not agreeable.

Whenever the coach stops, and you can hear the voices of the inside 
passengers; or whenever any bystander addresses them, or any one 
among them; or they address each other; you will hear one phrase 
repeated over and over and over again to the most extraordinary 
extent.  It is an ordinary and unpromising phrase enough, being 
neither more nor less than 'Yes, sir;' but it is adapted to every 
variety of circumstance, and fills up every pause in the 
conversation.  Thus:-

The time is one o'clock at noon.  The scene, a place where we are 
to stay and dine, on this journey.  The coach drives up to the door 
of an inn.  The day is warm, and there are several idlers lingering 
about the tavern, and waiting for the public dinner.  Among them, 
is a stout gentleman in a brown hat, swinging himself to and fro in 
a rocking-chair on the pavement.

As the coach stops, a gentleman in a straw hat looks out of the 
window:

STRAW HAT.  (To the stout gentleman in the rocking-chair.)  I 
reckon that's Judge Jefferson, an't it?

BROWN HAT.  (Still swinging; speaking very slowly; and without any 
emotion whatever.)  Yes, sir.

STRAW HAT.  Warm weather, Judge.

BROWN HAT.  Yes, sir.

STRAW HAT.  There was a snap of cold, last week.

BROWN HAT.  Yes, sir.

STRAW HAT.  Yes, sir.

A pause.  They look at each other, very seriously.

STRAW HAT.  I calculate you'll have got through that case of the 
corporation, Judge, by this time, now?

BROWN HAT.  Yes, sir.

STRAW HAT.  How did the verdict go, sir?

BROWN HAT.  For the defendant, sir.

STRAW HAT.  (Interrogatively.)  Yes, sir?

BROWN HAT. (Affirmatively.)  Yes, sir.

BOTH.  (Musingly, as each gazes down the street.)  Yes, sir.

Another pause.  They look at each other again, still more seriously 
than before.

BROWN HAT.  This coach is rather behind its time to-day, I guess.

STRAW HAT.  (Doubtingly.)  Yes, sir.

BROWN HAT.  (Looking at his watch.)  Yes, sir; nigh upon two hours.

STRAW HAT.  (Raising his eyebrows in very great surprise.)  Yes, 
sir!

BROWN HAT.  (Decisively, as he puts up his watch.)  Yes, sir.

ALL THE OTHER INSIDE PASSENGERS.  (Among themselves.)  Yes, sir.

COACHMAN.  (In a very surly tone.)  No it an't.

STRAW HAT.  (To the coachman.)  Well, I don't know, sir.  We were a 
pretty tall time coming that last fifteen mile.  That's a fact.

The coachman making no reply, and plainly declining to enter into 
any controversy on a subject so far removed from his sympathies and 
feelings, another passenger says, 'Yes, sir;' and the gentleman in 
the straw hat in acknowledgment of his courtesy, says 'Yes, sir,' 
to him, in return.  The straw hat then inquires of the brown hat, 
whether that coach in which he (the straw hat) then sits, is not a 
new one?  To which the brown hat again makes answer, 'Yes, sir.'

STRAW HAT.  I thought so.  Pretty loud smell of varnish, sir?

BROWN HAT.  Yes, sir.

ALL THE OTHER INSIDE PASSENGERS.  Yes, sir.

BROWN HAT.  (To the company in general.)  Yes, sir.

The conversational powers of the company having been by this time 
pretty heavily taxed, the straw hat opens the door and gets out; 
and all the rest alight also.  We dine soon afterwards with the 
boarders in the house, and have nothing to drink but tea and 
coffee.  As they are both very bad and the water is worse, I ask 
for brandy; but it is a Temperance Hotel, and spirits are not to be 
had for love or money.  This preposterous forcing of unpleasant 
drinks down the reluctant throats of travellers is not at all 
uncommon in America, but I never discovered that the scruples of 
such wincing landlords induced them to preserve any unusually nice 
balance between the quality of their fare, and their scale of 
charges:  on the contrary, I rather suspected them of diminishing 
the one and exalting the other, by way of recompense for the loss 
of their profit on the sale of spirituous liquors.  After all, 
perhaps, the plainest course for persons of such tender 
consciences, would be, a total abstinence from tavern-keeping.

Dinner over, we get into another vehicle which is ready at the door 
(for the coach has been changed in the interval), and resume our 
journey; which continues through the same kind of country until 
evening, when we come to the town where we are to stop for tea and 
supper; and having delivered the mail bags at the Post-office, ride 
through the usual wide street, lined with the usual stores and 
houses (the drapers always having hung up at their door, by way of 
sign, a piece of bright red cloth), to the hotel where this meal is 
prepared.  There being many boarders here, we sit down, a large 
party, and a very melancholy one as usual.  But there is a buxom 
hostess at the head of the table, and opposite, a simple Welsh 
schoolmaster with his wife and child; who came here, on a 
speculation of greater promise than performance, to teach the 
classics:  and they are sufficient subjects of interest until the 
meal is over, and another coach is ready.  In it we go on once 
more, lighted by a bright moon, until midnight; when we stop to 
change the coach again, and remain for half an hour or so in a 
miserable room, with a blurred lithograph of Washington over the 
smoky fire-place, and a mighty jug of cold water on the table:  to 
which refreshment the moody passengers do so apply themselves that 
they would seem to be, one and all, keen patients of Dr. Sangrado.  
Among them is a very little boy, who chews tobacco like a very big 
one; and a droning gentleman, who talks arithmetically and 
statistically on all subjects, from poetry downwards; and who 
always speaks in the same key, with exactly the same emphasis, and 
with very grave deliberation.  He came outside just now, and told 
me how that the uncle of a certain young lady who had been spirited 
away and married by a certain captain, lived in these parts; and 
how this uncle was so valiant and ferocious that he shouldn't 
wonder if he were to follow the said captain to England, 'and shoot 
him down in the street wherever he found him;' in the feasibility 
of which strong measure I, being for the moment rather prone to 
contradiction, from feeling half asleep and very tired, declined to 
acquiesce:  assuring him that if the uncle did resort to it, or 
gratified any other little whim of the like nature, he would find 
himself one morning prematurely throttled at the Old Bailey:  and 
that he would do well to make his will before he went, as he would 
certainly want it before he had been in Britain very long.

On we go, all night, and by-and-by the day begins to break, and 
presently the first cheerful rays of the warm sun come slanting on 
us brightly.  It sheds its light upon a miserable waste of sodden 
grass, and dull trees, and squalid huts, whose aspect is forlorn 
and grievous in the last degree.  A very desert in the wood, whose 
growth of green is dank and noxious like that upon the top of 
standing water:  where poisonous fungus grows in the rare footprint 
on the oozy ground, and sprouts like witches' coral, from the 
crevices in the cabin wall and floor; it is a hideous thing to lie 
upon the very threshold of a city.  But it was purchased years ago, 
and as the owner cannot be discovered, the State has been unable to 
reclaim it.  So there it remains, in the midst of cultivation and 
improvement, like ground accursed, and made obscene and rank by 
some great crime.

We reached Columbus shortly before seven o'clock, and stayed there, 
to refresh, that day and night:  having excellent apartments in a 
very large unfinished hotel called the Neill House, which were 
richly fitted with the polished wood of the black walnut, and 
opened on a handsome portico and stone verandah, like rooms in some 
Italian mansion.  The town is clean and pretty, and of course is 
'going to be' much larger.  It is the seat of the State legislature 
of Ohio, and lays claim, in consequence, to some consideration and 
importance.

There being no stage-coach next day, upon the road we wished to 
take, I hired 'an extra,' at a reasonable charge to carry us to 
Tiffin; a small town from whence there is a railroad to Sandusky.  
This extra was an ordinary four-horse stage-coach, such as I have 
described, changing horses and drivers, as the stage-coach would, 
but was exclusively our own for the journey.  To ensure our having 
horses at the proper stations, and being incommoded by no 
strangers, the proprietors sent an agent on the box, who was to 
accompany us the whole way through; and thus attended, and bearing 
with us, besides, a hamper full of savoury cold meats, and fruit, 
and wine, we started off again in high spirits, at half-past six 
o'clock next morning, very much delighted to be by ourselves, and 
disposed to enjoy even the roughest journey.

It was well for us, that we were in this humour, for the road we 
went over that day, was certainly enough to have shaken tempers 
that were not resolutely at Set Fair, down to some inches below 
Stormy.  At one time we were all flung together in a heap at the 
bottom of the coach, and at another we were crushing our heads 
against the roof.  Now, one side was down deep in the mire, and we 
were holding on to the other.  Now, the coach was lying on the 
tails of the two wheelers; and now it was rearing up in the air, in 
a frantic state, with all four horses standing on the top of an 
insurmountable eminence, looking coolly back at it, as though they 
would say 'Unharness us.  It can't be done.'  The drivers on these 
roads, who certainly get over the ground in a manner which is quite 
miraculous, so twist and turn the team about in forcing a passage, 
corkscrew fashion, through the bogs and swamps, that it was quite a 
common circumstance on looking out of the window, to see the 
coachman with the ends of a pair of reins in his hands, apparently 
driving nothing, or playing at horses, and the leaders staring at 
one unexpectedly from the back of the coach, as if they had some 
idea of getting up behind.  A great portion of the way was over 
what is called a corduroy road, which is made by throwing trunks of 
trees into a marsh, and leaving them to settle there.  The very 
slightest of the jolts with which the ponderous carriage fell from 
log to log, was enough, it seemed, to have dislocated all the bones 
in the human body.  It would be impossible to experience a similar 
set of sensations, in any other circumstances, unless perhaps in 
attempting to go up to the top of St. Paul's in an omnibus.  Never, 
never once, that day, was the coach in any position, attitude, or 
kind of motion to which we are accustomed in coaches.  Never did it 
make the smallest approach to one's experience of the proceedings 
of any sort of vehicle that goes on wheels.

Still, it was a fine day, and the temperature was delicious, and 
though we had left Summer behind us in the west, and were fast 
leaving Spring, we were moving towards Niagara and home.  We 
alighted in a pleasant wood towards the middle of the day, dined on 
a fallen tree, and leaving our best fragments with a cottager, and 
our worst with the pigs (who swarm in this part of the country like 
grains of sand on the sea-shore, to the great comfort of our 
commissariat in Canada), we went forward again, gaily.

As night came on, the track grew narrower and narrower, until at 
last it so lost itself among the trees, that the driver seemed to 
find his way by instinct.  We had the comfort of knowing, at least, 
that there was no danger of his falling asleep, for every now and 
then a wheel would strike against an unseen stump with such a jerk, 
that he was fain to hold on pretty tight and pretty quick, to keep 
himself upon the box.  Nor was there any reason to dread the least 
danger from furious driving, inasmuch as over that broken ground 
the horses had enough to do to walk; as to shying, there was no 
room for that; and a herd of wild elephants could not have run away 
in such a wood, with such a coach at their heels.  So we stumbled 
along, quite satisfied.

These stumps of trees are a curious feature in American travelling.  
The varying illusions they present to the unaccustomed eye as it 
grows dark, are quite astonishing in their number and reality.  
Now, there is a Grecian urn erected in the centre of a lonely 
field; now there is a woman weeping at a tomb; now a very 
commonplace old gentleman in a white waistcoat, with a thumb thrust 
into each arm-hole of his coat; now a student poring on a book; now 
a crouching negro; now, a horse, a dog, a cannon, an armed man; a 
hunch-back throwing off his cloak and stepping forth into the 
light.  They were often as entertaining to me as so many glasses in 
a magic lantern, and never took their shapes at my bidding, but 
seemed to force themselves upon me, whether I would or no; and 
strange to say, I sometimes recognised in them counterparts of 
figures once familiar to me in pictures attached to childish books, 
forgotten long ago.

It soon became too dark, however, even for this amusement, and the 
trees were so close together that their dry branches rattled 
against the coach on either side, and obliged us all to keep our 
heads within.  It lightened too, for three whole hours; each flash 
being very bright, and blue, and long; and as the vivid streaks 
came darting in among the crowded branches, and the thunder rolled 
gloomily above the tree tops, one could scarcely help thinking that 
there were better neighbourhoods at such a time than thick woods 
afforded.

At length, between ten and eleven o'clock at night, a few feeble 
lights appeared in the distance, and Upper Sandusky, an Indian 
village, where we were to stay till morning, lay before us.

They were gone to bed at the log Inn, which was the only house of 
entertainment in the place, but soon answered to our knocking, and 
got some tea for us in a sort of kitchen or common room, tapestried 
with old newspapers, pasted against the wall.  The bed-chamber to 
which my wife and I were shown, was a large, low, ghostly room; 
with a quantity of withered branches on the hearth, and two doors 
without any fastening, opposite to each other, both opening on the 
black night and wild country, and so contrived, that one of them 
always blew the other open:  a novelty in domestic architecture, 
which I do not remember to have seen before, and which I was 
somewhat disconcerted to have forced on my attention after getting 
into bed, as I had a considerable sum in gold for our travelling 
expenses, in my dressing-case.  Some of the luggage, however, piled 
against the panels, soon settled this difficulty, and my sleep 
would not have been very much affected that night, I believe, 
though it had failed to do so.

My Boston friend climbed up to bed, somewhere in the roof, where 
another guest was already snoring hugely.  But being bitten beyond 
his power of endurance, he turned out again, and fled for shelter 
to the coach, which was airing itself in front of the house.  This 
was not a very politic step, as it turned out; for the pigs 
scenting him, and looking upon the coach as a kind of pie with some 
manner of meat inside, grunted round it so hideously, that he was 
afraid to come out again, and lay there shivering, till morning.  
Nor was it possible to warm him, when he did come out, by means of 
a glass of brandy:  for in Indian villages, the legislature, with a 
very good and wise intention, forbids the sale of spirits by tavern 
keepers.  The precaution, however, is quite inefficacious, for the 
Indians never fail to procure liquor of a worse kind, at a dearer 
price, from travelling pedlars.

It is a settlement of the Wyandot Indians who inhabit this place.  
Among the company at breakfast was a mild old gentleman, who had 
been for many years employed by the United States Government in 
conducting negotiations with the Indians, and who had just 
concluded a treaty with these people by which they bound 
themselves, in consideration of a certain annual sum, to remove 
next year to some land provided for them, west of the Mississippi, 
and a little way beyond St. Louis.  He gave me a moving account of 
their strong attachment to the familiar scenes of their infancy, 
and in particular to the burial-places of their kindred; and of 
their great reluctance to leave them.  He had witnessed many such 
removals, and always with pain, though he knew that they departed 
for their own good.  The question whether this tribe should go or 
stay, had been discussed among them a day or two before, in a hut 
erected for the purpose, the logs of which still lay upon the 
ground before the inn.  When the speaking was done, the ayes and 
noes were ranged on opposite sides, and every male adult voted in 
his turn.  The moment the result was known, the minority (a large 
one) cheerfully yielded to the rest, and withdrew all kind of 
opposition.

We met some of these poor Indians afterwards, riding on shaggy 
ponies.  They were so like the meaner sort of gipsies, that if I 
could have seen any of them in England, I should have concluded, as 
a matter of course, that they belonged to that wandering and 
restless people.

Leaving this town directly after breakfast, we pushed forward 
again, over a rather worse road than yesterday, if possible, and 
arrived about noon at Tiffin, where we parted with the extra.  At 
two o'clock we took the railroad; the travelling on which was very 
slow, its construction being indifferent, and the ground wet and 
marshy; and arrived at Sandusky in time to dine that evening.  We 
put up at a comfortable little hotel on the brink of Lake Erie, lay 
there that night, and had no choice but to wait there next day, 
until a steamboat bound for Buffalo appeared.  The town, which was 
sluggish and uninteresting enough, was something like the back of 
an English watering-place, out of the season.

Our host, who was very attentive and anxious to make us 
comfortable, was a handsome middle-aged man, who had come to this 
town from New England, in which part of the country he was 
'raised.'  When I say that he constantly walked in and out of the 
room with his hat on; and stopped to converse in the same free-and-
easy state; and lay down on our sofa, and pulled his newspaper out 
of his pocket, and read it at his ease; I merely mention these 
traits as characteristic of the country:  not at all as being 
matter of complaint, or as having been disagreeable to me.  I 
should undoubtedly be offended by such proceedings at home, because 
there they are not the custom, and where they are not, they would 
be impertinencies; but in America, the only desire of a good-
natured fellow of this kind, is to treat his guests hospitably and 
well; and I had no more right, and I can truly say no more 
disposition, to measure his conduct by our English rule and 
standard, than I had to quarrel with him for not being of the exact 
stature which would qualify him for admission into the Queen's 
grenadier guards.  As little inclination had I to find fault with a 
funny old lady who was an upper domestic in this establishment, and 
who, when she came to wait upon us at any meal, sat herself down 
comfortably in the most convenient chair, and producing a large pin 
to pick her teeth with, remained performing that ceremony, and 
steadfastly regarding us meanwhile with much gravity and composure 
(now and then pressing us to eat a little more), until it was time 
to clear away.  It was enough for us, that whatever we wished done 
was done with great civility and readiness, and a desire to oblige, 
not only here, but everywhere else; and that all our wants were, in 
general, zealously anticipated.

We were taking an early dinner at this house, on the day after our 
arrival, which was Sunday, when a steamboat came in sight, and 
presently touched at the wharf.  As she proved to be on her way to 
Buffalo, we hurried on board with all speed, and soon left Sandusky 
far behind us.

She was a large vessel of five hundred tons, and handsomely fitted 
up, though with high-pressure engines; which always conveyed that 
kind of feeling to me, which I should be likely to experience, I 
think, if I had lodgings on the first-floor of a powder-mill.  She 
was laden with flour, some casks of which commodity were stored 
upon the deck.  The captain coming up to have a little 
conversation, and to introduce a friend, seated himself astride of 
one of these barrels, like a Bacchus of private life; and pulling a 
great clasp-knife out of his pocket, began to 'whittle' it as he 
talked, by paring thin slices off the edges.  And he whittled with 
such industry and hearty good will, that but for his being called 
away very soon, it must have disappeared bodily, and left nothing 
in its place but grist and shavings.

After calling at one or two flat places, with low dams stretching 
out into the lake, whereon were stumpy lighthouses, like windmills 
without sails, the whole looking like a Dutch vignette, we came at 
midnight to Cleveland, where we lay all night, and until nine 
o'clock next morning.

I entertained quite a curiosity in reference to this place, from 
having seen at Sandusky a specimen of its literature in the shape 
of a newspaper, which was very strong indeed upon the subject of 
Lord Ashburton's recent arrival at Washington, to adjust the points 
in dispute between the United States Government and Great Britain:  
informing its readers that as America had 'whipped' England in her 
infancy, and whipped her again in her youth, so it was clearly 
necessary that she must whip her once again in her maturity; and 
pledging its credit to all True Americans, that if Mr. Webster did 
his duty in the approaching negotiations, and sent the English Lord 
home again in double quick time, they should, within two years, 
sing 'Yankee Doodle in Hyde Park, and Hail Columbia in the scarlet 
courts of Westminster!'  I found it a pretty town, and had the 
satisfaction of beholding the outside of the office of the journal 
from which I have just quoted.  I did not enjoy the delight of 
seeing the wit who indited the paragraph in question, but I have no 
doubt he is a prodigious man in his way, and held in high repute by 
a select circle.

There was a gentleman on board, to whom, as I unintentionally 
learned through the thin partition which divided our state-room 
from the cabin in which he and his wife conversed together, I was 
unwittingly the occasion of very great uneasiness.  I don't know 
why or wherefore, but I appeared to run in his mind perpetually, 
and to dissatisfy him very much.  First of all I heard him say:  
and the most ludicrous part of the business was, that he said it in 
my very ear, and could not have communicated more directly with me, 
if he had leaned upon my shoulder, and whispered me:  'Boz is on 
board still, my dear.'  After a considerable pause, he added, 
complainingly, 'Boz keeps himself very close;' which was true 
enough, for I was not very well, and was lying down, with a book.  
I thought he had done with me after this, but I was deceived; for a 
long interval having elapsed, during which I imagine him to have 
been turning restlessly from side to side, and trying to go to 
sleep; he broke out again, with 'I suppose THAT Boz will be writing 
a book by-and-by, and putting all our names in it!' at which 
imaginary consequence of being on board a boat with Boz, he 
groaned, and became silent.

We called at the town of Erie, at eight o'clock that night, and lay 
there an hour.  Between five and six next morning, we arrived at 
Buffalo, where we breakfasted; and being too near the Great Falls 
to wait patiently anywhere else, we set off by the train, the same 
morning at nine o'clock, to Niagara.

It was a miserable day; chilly and raw; a damp mist falling; and 
the trees in that northern region quite bare and wintry.  Whenever 
the train halted, I listened for the roar; and was constantly 
straining my eyes in the direction where I knew the Falls must be, 
from seeing the river rolling on towards them; every moment 
expecting to behold the spray.  Within a few minutes of our 
stopping, not before, I saw two great white clouds rising up slowly 
and majestically from the depths of the earth.  That was all.  At 
length we alighted:  and then for the first time, I heard the 
mighty rush of water, and felt the ground tremble underneath my 
feet.

The bank is very steep, and was slippery with rain, and half-melted 
ice.  I hardly know how I got down, but I was soon at the bottom, 
and climbing, with two English officers who were crossing and had 
joined me, over some broken rocks, deafened by the noise, half-
blinded by the spray, and wet to the skin.  We were at the foot of 
the American Fall.  I could see an immense torrent of water tearing 
headlong down from some great height, but had no idea of shape, or 
situation, or anything but vague immensity.

When we were seated in the little ferry-boat, and were crossing the 
swollen river immediately before both cataracts, I began to feel 
what it was:  but I was in a manner stunned, and unable to 
comprehend the vastness of the scene.  It was not until I came on 
Table Rock, and looked - Great Heaven, on what a fall of bright-
green water! - that it came upon me in its full might and majesty.

Then, when I felt how near to my Creator I was standing, the first 
effect, and the enduring one - instant and lasting - of the 
tremendous spectacle, was Peace.  Peace of Mind, tranquillity, calm 
recollections of the Dead, great thoughts of Eternal Rest and 
Happiness:  nothing of gloom or terror.  Niagara was at once 
stamped upon my heart, an Image of Beauty; to remain there, 
changeless and indelible, until its pulses cease to beat, for ever.

Oh, how the strife and trouble of daily life receded from my view, 
and lessened in the distance, during the ten memorable days we 
passed on that Enchanted Ground!  What voices spoke from out the 
thundering water; what faces, faded from the earth, looked out upon 
me from its gleaming depths; what Heavenly promise glistened in 
those angels' tears, the drops of many hues, that showered around, 
and twined themselves about the gorgeous arches which the changing 
rainbows made!

I never stirred in all that time from the Canadian side, whither I 
had gone at first.  I never crossed the river again; for I knew 
there were people on the other shore, and in such a place it is 
natural to shun strange company.  To wander to and fro all day, and 
see the cataracts from all points of view; to stand upon the edge 
of the great Horse-Shoe Fall, marking the hurried water gathering 
strength as it approached the verge, yet seeming, too, to pause 
before it shot into the gulf below; to gaze from the river's level 
up at the torrent as it came streaming down; to climb the 
neighbouring heights and watch it through the trees, and see the 
wreathing water in the rapids hurrying on to take its fearful 
plunge; to linger in the shadow of the solemn rocks three miles 
below; watching the river as, stirred by no visible cause, it 
heaved and eddied and awoke the echoes, being troubled yet, far 
down beneath the surface, by its giant leap; to have Niagara before 
me, lighted by the sun and by the moon, red in the day's decline, 
and grey as evening slowly fell upon it; to look upon it every day, 
and wake up in the night and hear its ceaseless voice:  this was 
enough.

I think in every quiet season now, still do those waters roll and 
leap, and roar and tumble, all day long; still are the rainbows 
spanning them, a hundred feet below.  Still, when the sun is on 
them, do they shine and glow like molten gold.  Still, when the day 
is gloomy, do they fall like snow, or seem to crumble away like the 
front of a great chalk cliff, or roll down the rock like dense 
white smoke.  But always does the mighty stream appear to die as it 
comes down, and always from its unfathomable grave arises that 
tremendous ghost of spray and mist which is never laid:  which has 
haunted this place with the same dread solemnity since Darkness 
brooded on the deep, and that first flood before the Deluge - Light 
- came rushing on Creation at the word of God.



CHAPTER XV - IN CANADA; TORONTO; KINGSTON; MONTREAL; QUEBEC; ST. 
JOHN'S.  IN THE UNITED STATES AGAIN; LEBANON; THE SHAKER VILLAGE; 
WEST POINT



I wish to abstain from instituting any comparison, or drawing any 
parallel whatever, between the social features of the United States 
and those of the British Possessions in Canada.  For this reason, I 
shall confine myself to a very brief account of our journeyings in 
the latter territory.

But before I leave Niagara, I must advert to one disgusting 
circumstance which can hardly have escaped the observation of any 
decent traveller who has visited the Falls.

On Table Rock, there is a cottage belonging to a Guide, where 
little relics of the place are sold, and where visitors register 
their names in a book kept for the purpose.  On the wall of the 
room in which a great many of these volumes are preserved, the 
following request is posted:  'Visitors will please not copy nor 
extract the remarks and poetical effusions from the registers and 
albums kept here.'

But for this intimation, I should have let them lie upon the tables 
on which they were strewn with careful negligence, like books in a 
drawing-room:  being quite satisfied with the stupendous silliness 
of certain stanzas with an anti-climax at the end of each, which 
were framed and hung up on the wall.  Curious, however, after 
reading this announcement, to see what kind of morsels were so 
carefully preserved, I turned a few leaves, and found them scrawled 
all over with the vilest and the filthiest ribaldry that ever human 
hogs delighted in.

It is humiliating enough to know that there are among men brutes so 
obscene and worthless, that they can delight in laying their 
miserable profanations upon the very steps of Nature's greatest 
altar.  But that these should be hoarded up for the delight of 
their fellow-swine, and kept in a public place where any eyes may 
see them, is a disgrace to the English language in which they are 
written (though I hope few of these entries have been made by 
Englishmen), and a reproach to the English side, on which they are 
preserved.

The quarters of our soldiers at Niagara, are finely and airily 
situated.  Some of them are large detached houses on the plain 
above the Falls, which were originally designed for hotels; and in 
the evening time, when the women and children were leaning over the 
balconies watching the men as they played at ball and other games 
upon the grass before the door, they often presented a little 
picture of cheerfulness and animation which made it quite a 
pleasure to pass that way.

At any garrisoned point where the line of demarcation between one 
country and another is so very narrow as at Niagara, desertion from 
the ranks can scarcely fail to be of frequent occurrence:  and it 
may be reasonably supposed that when the soldiers entertain the 
wildest and maddest hopes of the fortune and independence that 
await them on the other side, the impulse to play traitor, which 
such a place suggests to dishonest minds, is not weakened.  But it 
very rarely happens that the men who do desert, are happy or 
contented afterwards; and many instances have been known in which 
they have confessed their grievous disappointment, and their 
earnest desire to return to their old service if they could but be 
assured of pardon, or lenient treatment.  Many of their comrades, 
notwithstanding, do the like, from time to time; and instances of 
loss of life in the effort to cross the river with this object, are 
far from being uncommon.  Several men were drowned in the attempt 
to swim across, not long ago; and one, who had the madness to trust 
himself upon a table as a raft, was swept down to the whirlpool, 
where his mangled body eddied round and round some days.

I am inclined to think that the noise of the Falls is very much 
exaggerated; and this will appear the more probable when the depth 
of the great basin in which the water is received, is taken into 
account.  At no time during our stay there, was the wind at all 
high or boisterous, but we never heard them, three miles off, even 
at the very quiet time of sunset, though we often tried.

Queenston, at which place the steamboats start for Toronto (or I 
should rather say at which place they call, for their wharf is at 
Lewiston, on the opposite shore), is situated in a delicious 
valley, through which the Niagara river, in colour a very deep 
green, pursues its course.  It is approached by a road that takes 
its winding way among the heights by which the town is sheltered; 
and seen from this point is extremely beautiful and picturesque.  
On the most conspicuous of these heights stood a monument erected 
by the Provincial Legislature in memory of General Brock, who was 
slain in a battle with the American forces, after having won the 
victory.  Some vagabond, supposed to be a fellow of the name of 
Lett, who is now, or who lately was, in prison as a felon, blew up 
this monument two years ago, and it is now a melancholy ruin, with 
a long fragment of iron railing hanging dejectedly from its top, 
and waving to and fro like a wild ivy branch or broken vine stem.  
It is of much higher importance than it may seem, that this statue 
should be repaired at the public cost, as it ought to have been 
long ago.  Firstly, because it is beneath the dignity of England to 
allow a memorial raised in honour of one of her defenders, to 
remain in this condition, on the very spot where he died.  
Secondly, because the sight of it in its present state, and the 
recollection of the unpunished outrage which brought it to this 
pass, is not very likely to soothe down border feelings among 
English subjects here, or compose their border quarrels and 
dislikes.

I was standing on the wharf at this place, watching the passengers 
embarking in a steamboat which preceded that whose coming we 
awaited, and participating in the anxiety with which a sergeant's 
wife was collecting her few goods together - keeping one distracted 
eye hard upon the porters, who were hurrying them on board, and the 
other on a hoopless washing-tub for which, as being the most 
utterly worthless of all her movables, she seemed to entertain 
particular affection - when three or four soldiers with a recruit 
came up and went on board.

The recruit was a likely young fellow enough, strongly built and 
well made, but by no means sober:  indeed he had all the air of a 
man who had been more or less drunk for some days.  He carried a 
small bundle over his shoulder, slung at the end of a walking-
stick, and had a short pipe in his mouth.  He was as dusty and 
dirty as recruits usually are, and his shoes betokened that he had 
travelled on foot some distance, but he was in a very jocose state, 
and shook hands with this soldier, and clapped that one on the 
back, and talked and laughed continually, like a roaring idle dog 
as he was.

The soldiers rather laughed at this blade than with him:  seeming 
to say, as they stood straightening their canes in their hands, and 
looking coolly at him over their glazed stocks, 'Go on, my boy, 
while you may! you'll know better by-and-by:' when suddenly the 
novice, who had been backing towards the gangway in his noisy 
merriment, fell overboard before their eyes, and splashed heavily 
down into the river between the vessel and the dock.

I never saw such a good thing as the change that came over these 
soldiers in an instant.  Almost before the man was down, their 
professional manner, their stiffness and constraint, were gone, and 
they were filled with the most violent energy.  In less time than 
is required to tell it, they had him out again, feet first, with 
the tails of his coat flapping over his eyes, everything about him 
hanging the wrong way, and the water streaming off at every thread 
in his threadbare dress.  But the moment they set him upright and 
found that he was none the worse, they were soldiers again, looking 
over their glazed stocks more composedly than ever.

The half-sobered recruit glanced round for a moment, as if his 
first impulse were to express some gratitude for his preservation, 
but seeing them with this air of total unconcern, and having his 
wet pipe presented to him with an oath by the soldier who had been 
by far the most anxious of the party, he stuck it in his mouth, 
thrust his hands into his moist pockets, and without even shaking 
the water off his clothes, walked on board whistling; not to say as 
if nothing had happened, but as if he had meant to do it, and it 
had been a perfect success.

Our steamboat came up directly this had left the wharf, and soon 
bore us to the mouth of the Niagara; where the stars and stripes of 
America flutter on one side and the Union Jack of England on the 
other:  and so narrow is the space between them that the sentinels 
in either fort can often hear the watchword of the other country 
given.  Thence we emerged on Lake Ontario, an inland sea; and by 
half-past six o'clock were at Toronto.

The country round this town being very flat, is bare of scenic 
interest; but the town itself is full of life and motion, bustle, 
business, and improvement.  The streets are well paved, and lighted 
with gas; the houses are large and good; the shops excellent.  Many 
of them have a display of goods in their windows, such as may be 
seen in thriving county towns in England; and there are some which 
would do no discredit to the metropolis itself.  There is a good 
stone prison here; and there are, besides, a handsome church, a 
court-house, public offices, many commodious private residences, 
and a government observatory for noting and recording the magnetic 
variations.  In the College of Upper Canada, which is one of the 
public establishments of the city, a sound education in every 
department of polite learning can be had, at a very moderate 
expense:  the annual charge for the instruction of each pupil, not 
exceeding nine pounds sterling.  It has pretty good endowments in 
the way of land, and is a valuable and useful institution.

The first stone of a new college had been laid but a few days 
before, by the Governor General.  It will be a handsome, spacious 
edifice, approached by a long avenue, which is already planted and 
made available as a public walk.  The town is well adapted for 
wholesome exercise at all seasons, for the footways in the 
thoroughfares which lie beyond the principal street, are planked 
like floors, and kept in very good and clean repair.

It is a matter of deep regret that political differences should 
have run high in this place, and led to most discreditable and 
disgraceful results.  It is not long since guns were discharged 
from a window in this town at the successful candidates in an 
election, and the coachman of one of them was actually shot in the 
body, though not dangerously wounded.  But one man was killed on 
the same occasion; and from the very window whence he received his 
death, the very flag which shielded his murderer (not only in the 
commission of his crime, but from its consequences), was displayed 
again on the occasion of the public ceremony performed by the 
Governor General, to which I have just adverted.  Of all the 
colours in the rainbow, there is but one which could be so 
employed:  I need not say that flag was orange.

The time of leaving Toronto for Kingston is noon.  By eight o'clock 
next morning, the traveller is at the end of his journey, which is 
performed by steamboat upon Lake Ontario, calling at Port Hope and 
Coburg, the latter a cheerful, thriving little town.  Vast 
quantities of flour form the chief item in the freight of these 
vessels.  We had no fewer than one thousand and eighty barrels on 
board, between Coburg and Kingston.

The latter place, which is now the seat of government in Canada, is 
a very poor town, rendered still poorer in the appearance of its 
market-place by the ravages of a recent fire.  Indeed, it may be 
said of Kingston, that one half of it appears to be burnt down, and 
the other half not to be built up.  The Government House is neither 
elegant nor commodious, yet it is almost the only house of any 
importance in the neighbourhood.

There is an admirable jail here, well and wisely governed, and 
excellently regulated, in every respect.  The men were employed as 
shoemakers, ropemakers, blacksmiths, tailors, carpenters, and 
stonecutters; and in building a new prison, which was pretty far 
advanced towards completion.  The female prisoners were occupied in 
needlework.  Among them was a beautiful girl of twenty, who had 
been there nearly three years.  She acted as bearer of secret 
despatches for the self-styled Patriots on Navy Island, during the 
Canadian Insurrection:  sometimes dressing as a girl, and carrying 
them in her stays; sometimes attiring herself as a boy, and 
secreting them in the lining of her hat.  In the latter character 
she always rode as a boy would, which was nothing to her, for she 
could govern any horse that any man could ride, and could drive 
four-in-hand with the best whip in those parts.  Setting forth on 
one of her patriotic missions, she appropriated to herself the 
first horse she could lay her hands on; and this offence had 
brought her where I saw her.  She had quite a lovely face, though, 
as the reader may suppose from this sketch of her history, there 
was a lurking devil in her bright eye, which looked out pretty 
sharply from between her prison bars.

There is a bomb-proof fort here of great strength, which occupies a 
bold position, and is capable, doubtless, of doing good service; 
though the town is much too close upon the frontier to be long 
held, I should imagine, for its present purpose in troubled times.  
There is also a small navy-yard, where a couple of Government 
steamboats were building, and getting on vigorously.

We left Kingston for Montreal on the tenth of May, at half-past 
nine in the morning, and proceeded in a steamboat down the St. 
Lawrence river.  The beauty of this noble stream at almost any 
point, but especially in the commencement of this journey when it 
winds its way among the thousand Islands, can hardly be imagined.  
The number and constant successions of these islands, all green and 
richly wooded; their fluctuating sizes, some so large that for half 
an hour together one among them will appear as the opposite bank of 
the river, and some so small that they are mere dimples on its 
broad bosom; their infinite variety of shapes; and the numberless 
combinations of beautiful forms which the trees growing on them 
present:  all form a picture fraught with uncommon interest and 
pleasure.

In the afternoon we shot down some rapids where the river boiled 
and bubbled strangely, and where the force and headlong violence of 
the current were tremendous.  At seven o'clock we reached 
Dickenson's Landing, whence travellers proceed for two or three 
hours by stage-coach:  the navigation of the river being rendered 
so dangerous and difficult in the interval, by rapids, that 
steamboats do not make the passage.  The number and length of those 
PORTAGES, over which the roads are bad, and the travelling slow, 
render the way between the towns of Montreal and Kingston, somewhat 
tedious.

Our course lay over a wide, uninclosed tract of country at a little 
distance from the river-side, whence the bright warning lights on 
the dangerous parts of the St. Lawrence shone vividly.  The night 
was dark and raw, and the way dreary enough.  It was nearly ten 
o'clock when we reached the wharf where the next steamboat lay; and 
went on board, and to bed.

She lay there all night, and started as soon as it was day.  The 
morning was ushered in by a violent thunderstorm, and was very wet, 
but gradually improved and brightened up.  Going on deck after 
breakfast, I was amazed to see floating down with the stream, a 
most gigantic raft, with some thirty or forty wooden houses upon 
it, and at least as many flag-masts, so that it looked like a 
nautical street.  I saw many of these rafts afterwards, but never 
one so large.  All the timber, or 'lumber,' as it is called in 
America, which is brought down the St. Lawrence, is floated down in 
this manner.  When the raft reaches its place of destination, it is 
broken up; the materials are sold; and the boatmen return for more.

At eight we landed again, and travelled by a stage-coach for four 
hours through a pleasant and well-cultivated country, perfectly 
French in every respect:  in the appearance of the cottages; the 
air, language, and dress of the peasantry; the sign-boards on the 
shops and taverns:  and the Virgin's shrines, and crosses, by the 
wayside.  Nearly every common labourer and boy, though he had no 
shoes to his feet, wore round his waist a sash of some bright 
colour:  generally red:  and the women, who were working in the 
fields and gardens, and doing all kinds of husbandry, wore, one and 
all, great flat straw hats with most capacious brims.  There were 
Catholic Priests and Sisters of Charity in the village streets; and 
images of the Saviour at the corners of cross-roads, and in other 
public places.

At noon we went on board another steamboat, and reached the village 
of Lachine, nine miles from Montreal, by three o'clock.  There, we 
left the river, and went on by land.

Montreal is pleasantly situated on the margin of the St. Lawrence, 
and is backed by some bold heights, about which there are charming 
rides and drives.  The streets are generally narrow and irregular, 
as in most French towns of any age; but in the more modern parts of 
the city, they are wide and airy.  They display a great variety of 
very good shops; and both in the town and suburbs there are many 
excellent private dwellings.  The granite quays are remarkable for 
their beauty, solidity, and extent.

There is a very large Catholic cathedral here, recently erected 
with two tall spires, of which one is yet unfinished.  In the open 
space in front of this edifice, stands a solitary, grim-looking, 
square brick tower, which has a quaint and remarkable appearance, 
and which the wiseacres of the place have consequently determined 
to pull down immediately.  The Government House is very superior to 
that at Kingston, and the town is full of life and bustle.  In one 
of the suburbs is a plank road - not footpath - five or six miles 
long, and a famous road it is too.  All the rides in the vicinity 
were made doubly interesting by the bursting out of spring, which 
is here so rapid, that it is but a day's leap from barren winter, 
to the blooming youth of summer.

The steamboats to Quebec perform the journey in the night; that is 
to say, they leave Montreal at six in the evening, and arrive at 
Quebec at six next morning.  We made this excursion during our stay 
in Montreal (which exceeded a fortnight), and were charmed by its 
interest and beauty.

The impression made upon the visitor by this Gibraltar of America:  
its giddy heights; its citadel suspended, as it were, in the air; 
its picturesque steep streets and frowning gateways; and the 
splendid views which burst upon the eye at every turn:  is at once 
unique and lasting.

It is a place not to be forgotten or mixed up in the mind with 
other places, or altered for a moment in the crowd of scenes a 
traveller can recall.  Apart from the realities of this most 
picturesque city, there are associations clustering about it which 
would make a desert rich in interest.  The dangerous precipice 
along whose rocky front, Wolfe and his brave companions climbed to 
glory; the Plains of Abraham, where he received his mortal wound; 
the fortress so chivalrously defended by Montcalm; and his 
soldier's grave, dug for him while yet alive, by the bursting of a 
shell; are not the least among them, or among the gallant incidents 
of history.  That is a noble Monument too, and worthy of two great 
nations, which perpetuates the memory of both brave generals, and 
on which their names are jointly written.

The city is rich in public institutions and in Catholic churches 
and charities, but it is mainly in the prospect from the site of 
the Old Government House, and from the Citadel, that its surpassing 
beauty lies.  The exquisite expanse of country, rich in field and 
forest, mountain-height and water, which lies stretched out before 
the view, with miles of Canadian villages, glancing in long white 
streaks, like veins along the landscape; the motley crowd of 
gables, roofs, and chimney tops in the old hilly town immediately 
at hand; the beautiful St. Lawrence sparkling and flashing in the 
sunlight; and the tiny ships below the rock from which you gaze, 
whose distant rigging looks like spiders' webs against the light, 
while casks and barrels on their decks dwindle into toys, and busy 
mariners become so many puppets; all this, framed by a sunken 
window in the fortress and looked at from the shadowed room within, 
forms one of the brightest and most enchanting pictures that the 
eye can rest upon.

In the spring of the year, vast numbers of emigrants who have newly 
arrived from England or from Ireland, pass between Quebec and 
Montreal on their way to the backwoods and new settlements of 
Canada.  If it be an entertaining lounge (as I very often found it) 
to take a morning stroll upon the quay at Montreal, and see them 
grouped in hundreds on the public wharfs about their chests and 
boxes, it is matter of deep interest to be their fellow-passenger 
on one of these steamboats, and mingling with the concourse, see 
and hear them unobserved.

The vessel in which we returned from Quebec to Montreal was crowded 
with them, and at night they spread their beds between decks (those 
who had beds, at least), and slept so close and thick about our 
cabin door, that the passage to and fro was quite blocked up.  They 
were nearly all English; from Gloucestershire the greater part; and 
had had a long winter-passage out; but it was wonderful to see how 
clean the children had been kept, and how untiring in their love 
and self-denial all the poor parents were.

Cant as we may, and as we shall to the end of all things, it is 
very much harder for the poor to be virtuous than it is for the 
rich; and the good that is in them, shines the brighter for it.  In 
many a noble mansion lives a man, the best of husbands and of 
fathers, whose private worth in both capacities is justly lauded to 
the skies.  But bring him here, upon this crowded deck.  Strip from 
his fair young wife her silken dress and jewels, unbind her braided 
hair, stamp early wrinkles on her brow, pinch her pale cheek with 
care and much privation, array her faded form in coarsely patched 
attire, let there be nothing but his love to set her forth or deck 
her out, and you shall put it to the proof indeed.  So change his 
station in the world, that he shall see in those young things who 
climb about his knee:  not records of his wealth and name:  but 
little wrestlers with him for his daily bread; so many poachers on 
his scanty meal; so many units to divide his every sum of comfort, 
and farther to reduce its small amount.  In lieu of the endearments 
of childhood in its sweetest aspect, heap upon him all its pains 
and wants, its sicknesses and ills, its fretfulness, caprice, and 
querulous endurance:  let its prattle be, not of engaging infant 
fancies, but of cold, and thirst, and hunger:  and if his fatherly 
affection outlive all this, and he be patient, watchful, tender; 
careful of his children's lives, and mindful always of their joys 
and sorrows; then send him back to Parliament, and Pulpit, and to 
Quarter Sessions, and when he hears fine talk of the depravity of 
those who live from hand to mouth, and labour hard to do it, let 
him speak up, as one who knows, and tell those holders forth that 
they, by parallel with such a class, should be High Angels in their 
daily lives, and lay but humble siege to Heaven at last.

Which of us shall say what he would be, if such realities, with 
small relief or change all through his days, were his!  Looking 
round upon these people:  far from home, houseless, indigent, 
wandering, weary with travel and hard living:  and seeing how 
patiently they nursed and tended their young children:  how they 
consulted ever their wants first, then half supplied their own; 
what gentle ministers of hope and faith the women were; how the men 
profited by their example; and how very, very seldom even a 
moment's petulance or harsh complaint broke out among them:  I felt 
a stronger love and honour of my kind come glowing on my heart, and 
wished to God there had been many Atheists in the better part of 
human nature there, to read this simple lesson in the book of Life.

* * * * * *

We left Montreal for New York again, on the thirtieth of May, 
crossing to La Prairie, on the opposite shore of the St. Lawrence, 
in a steamboat; we then took the railroad to St. John's, which is 
on the brink of Lake Champlain.  Our last greeting in Canada was 
from the English officers in the pleasant barracks at that place (a 
class of gentlemen who had made every hour of our visit memorable 
by their hospitality and friendship); and with 'Rule Britannia' 
sounding in our ears, soon left it far behind.

But Canada has held, and always will retain, a foremost place in my 
remembrance.  Few Englishmen are prepared to find it what it is.  
Advancing quietly; old differences settling down, and being fast 
forgotten; public feeling and private enterprise alike in a sound 
and wholesome state; nothing of flush or fever in its system, but 
health and vigour throbbing in its steady pulse:  it is full of 
hope and promise.  To me - who had been accustomed to think of it 
as something left behind in the strides of advancing society, as 
something neglected and forgotten, slumbering and wasting in its 
sleep - the demand for labour and the rates of wages; the busy 
quays of Montreal; the vessels taking in their cargoes, and 
discharging them; the amount of shipping in the different ports; 
the commerce, roads, and public works, all made TO LAST; the 
respectability and character of the public journals; and the amount 
of rational comfort and happiness which honest industry may earn:  
were very great surprises.  The steamboats on the lakes, in their 
conveniences, cleanliness, and safety; in the gentlemanly character 
and bearing of their captains; and in the politeness and perfect 
comfort of their social regulations; are unsurpassed even by the 
famous Scotch vessels, deservedly so much esteemed at home.  The 
inns are usually bad; because the custom of boarding at hotels is 
not so general here as in the States, and the British officers, who 
form a large portion of the society of every town, live chiefly at 
the regimental messes:  but in every other respect, the traveller 
in Canada will find as good provision for his comfort as in any 
place I know.

There is one American boat - the vessel which carried us on Lake 
Champlain, from St. John's to Whitehall - which I praise very 
highly, but no more than it deserves, when I say that it is 
superior even to that in which we went from Queenston to Toronto, 
or to that in which we travelled from the latter place to Kingston, 
or I have no doubt I may add to any other in the world.  This 
steamboat, which is called the Burlington, is a perfectly exquisite 
achievement of neatness, elegance, and order.  The decks are 
drawing-rooms; the cabins are boudoirs, choicely furnished and 
adorned with prints, pictures, and musical instruments; every nook 
and corner in the vessel is a perfect curiosity of graceful comfort 
and beautiful contrivance.  Captain Sherman, her commander, to 
whose ingenuity and excellent taste these results are solely 
attributable, has bravely and worthily distinguished himself on 
more than one trying occasion:  not least among them, in having the 
moral courage to carry British troops, at a time (during the 
Canadian rebellion) when no other conveyance was open to them.  He 
and his vessel are held in universal respect, both by his own 
countrymen and ours; and no man ever enjoyed the popular esteem, 
who, in his sphere of action, won and wore it better than this 
gentleman.

By means of this floating palace we were soon in the United States 
again, and called that evening at Burlington; a pretty town, where 
we lay an hour or so.  We reached Whitehall, where we were to 
disembark, at six next morning; and might have done so earlier, but 
that these steamboats lie by for some hours in the night, in 
consequence of the lake becoming very narrow at that part of the 
journey, and difficult of navigation in the dark.  Its width is so 
contracted at one point, indeed, that they are obliged to warp 
round by means of a rope.

After breakfasting at Whitehall, we took the stage-coach for 
Albany:  a large and busy town, where we arrived between five and 
six o'clock that afternoon; after a very hot day's journey, for we 
were now in the height of summer again.  At seven we started for 
New York on board a great North River steamboat, which was so 
crowded with passengers that the upper deck was like the box lobby 
of a theatre between the pieces, and the lower one like Tottenham 
Court Road on a Saturday night.  But we slept soundly, 
notwithstanding, and soon after five o'clock next morning reached 
New York.

Tarrying here, only that day and night, to recruit after our late 
fatigues, we started off once more upon our last journey in 
America.  We had yet five days to spare before embarking for 
England, and I had a great desire to see 'the Shaker Village,' 
which is peopled by a religious sect from whom it takes its name.

To this end, we went up the North River again, as far as the town 
of Hudson, and there hired an extra to carry us to Lebanon, thirty 
miles distant:  and of course another and a different Lebanon from 
that village where I slept on the night of the Prairie trip.

The country through which the road meandered, was rich and 
beautiful; the weather very fine; and for many miles the Kaatskill 
mountains, where Rip Van Winkle and the ghostly Dutchmen played at 
ninepins one memorable gusty afternoon, towered in the blue 
distance, like stately clouds.  At one point, as we ascended a 
steep hill, athwart whose base a railroad, yet constructing, took 
its course, we came upon an Irish colony.  With means at hand of 
building decent cabins, it was wonderful to see how clumsy, rough, 
and wretched, its hovels were.  The best were poor protection from 
the weather the worst let in the wind and rain through wide 
breaches in the roofs of sodden grass, and in the walls of mud; 
some had neither door nor window; some had nearly fallen down, and 
were imperfectly propped up by stakes and poles; all were ruinous 
and filthy.  Hideously ugly old women and very buxom young ones, 
pigs, dogs, men, children, babies, pots, kettles, dung-hills, vile 
refuse, rank straw, and standing water, all wallowing together in 
an inseparable heap, composed the furniture of every dark and dirty 
hut.

Between nine and ten o'clock at night, we arrived at Lebanon which 
is renowned for its warm baths, and for a great hotel, well 
adapted, I have no doubt, to the gregarious taste of those seekers 
after health or pleasure who repair here, but inexpressibly 
comfortless to me.  We were shown into an immense apartment, 
lighted by two dim candles, called the drawing-room:  from which 
there was a descent by a flight of steps, to another vast desert, 
called the dining-room:  our bed-chambers were among certain long 
rows of little white-washed cells, which opened from either side of 
a dreary passage; and were so like rooms in a prison that I half 
expected to be locked up when I went to bed, and listened 
involuntarily for the turning of the key on the outside.  There 
need be baths somewhere in the neighbourhood, for the other washing 
arrangements were on as limited a scale as I ever saw, even in 
America:  indeed, these bedrooms were so very bare of even such 
common luxuries as chairs, that I should say they were not provided 
with enough of anything, but that I bethink myself of our having 
been most bountifully bitten all night.

The house is very pleasantly situated, however, and we had a good 
breakfast.  That done, we went to visit our place of destination, 
which was some two miles off, and the way to which was soon 
indicated by a finger-post, whereon was painted, 'To the Shaker 
Village.'

As we rode along, we passed a party of Shakers, who were at work 
upon the road; who wore the broadest of all broad-brimmed hats; and 
were in all visible respects such very wooden men, that I felt 
about as much sympathy for them, and as much interest in them, as 
if they had been so many figure-heads of ships.  Presently we came 
to the beginning of the village, and alighting at the door of a 
house where the Shaker manufactures are sold, and which is the 
headquarters of the elders, requested permission to see the Shaker 
worship.

Pending the conveyance of this request to some person in authority, 
we walked into a grim room, where several grim hats were hanging on 
grim pegs, and the time was grimly told by a grim clock which 
uttered every tick with a kind of struggle, as if it broke the grim 
silence reluctantly, and under protest.  Ranged against the wall 
were six or eight stiff, high-backed chairs, and they partook so 
strongly of the general grimness that one would much rather have 
sat on the floor than incurred the smallest obligation to any of 
them.

Presently, there stalked into this apartment, a grim old Shaker, 
with eyes as hard, and dull, and cold, as the great round metal 
buttons on his coat and waistcoat; a sort of calm goblin.  Being 
informed of our desire, he produced a newspaper wherein the body of 
elders, whereof he was a member, had advertised but a few days 
before, that in consequence of certain unseemly interruptions which 
their worship had received from strangers, their chapel was closed 
to the public for the space of one year.

As nothing was to be urged in opposition to this reasonable 
arrangement, we requested leave to make some trifling purchases of 
Shaker goods; which was grimly conceded.  We accordingly repaired 
to a store in the same house and on the opposite side of the 
passage, where the stock was presided over by something alive in a 
russet case, which the elder said was a woman; and which I suppose 
WAS a woman, though I should not have suspected it.

On the opposite side of the road was their place of worship:  a 
cool, clean edifice of wood, with large windows and green blinds:  
like a spacious summer-house.  As there was no getting into this 
place, and nothing was to be done but walk up and down, and look at 
it and the other buildings in the village (which were chiefly of 
wood, painted a dark red like English barns, and composed of many 
stories like English factories), I have nothing to communicate to 
the reader, beyond the scanty results I gleaned the while our 
purchases were making,

These people are called Shakers from their peculiar form of 
adoration, which consists of a dance, performed by the men and 
women of all ages, who arrange themselves for that purpose in 
opposite parties:  the men first divesting themselves of their hats 
and coats, which they gravely hang against the wall before they 
begin; and tying a ribbon round their shirt-sleeves, as though they 
were going to be bled.  They accompany themselves with a droning, 
humming noise, and dance until they are quite exhausted, 
alternately advancing and retiring in a preposterous sort of trot.  
The effect is said to be unspeakably absurd:  and if I may judge 
from a print of this ceremony which I have in my possession; and 
which I am informed by those who have visited the chapel, is 
perfectly accurate; it must be infinitely grotesque.

They are governed by a woman, and her rule is understood to be 
absolute, though she has the assistance of a council of elders.  
She lives, it is said, in strict seclusion, in certain rooms above 
the chapel, and is never shown to profane eyes.  If she at all 
resemble the lady who presided over the store, it is a great 
charity to keep her as close as possible, and I cannot too strongly 
express my perfect concurrence in this benevolent proceeding.

All the possessions and revenues of the settlement are thrown into 
a common stock, which is managed by the elders.  As they have made 
converts among people who were well to do in the world, and are 
frugal and thrifty, it is understood that this fund prospers:  the 
more especially as they have made large purchases of land.  Nor is 
this at Lebanon the only Shaker settlement:  there are, I think, at 
least, three others.

They are good farmers, and all their produce is eagerly purchased 
and highly esteemed.  'Shaker seeds,' 'Shaker herbs,' and 'Shaker 
distilled waters,' are commonly announced for sale in the shops of 
towns and cities.  They are good breeders of cattle, and are kind 
and merciful to the brute creation.  Consequently, Shaker beasts 
seldom fail to find a ready market.

They eat and drink together, after the Spartan model, at a great 
public table.  There is no union of the sexes, and every Shaker, 
male and female, is devoted to a life of celibacy.  Rumour has been 
busy upon this theme, but here again I must refer to the lady of 
the store, and say, that if many of the sister Shakers resemble 
her, I treat all such slander as bearing on its face the strongest 
marks of wild improbability.  But that they take as proselytes, 
persons so young that they cannot know their own minds, and cannot 
possess much strength of resolution in this or any other respect, I 
can assert from my own observation of the extreme juvenility of 
certain youthful Shakers whom I saw at work among the party on the 
road.

They are said to be good drivers of bargains, but to be honest and 
just in their transactions, and even in horse-dealing to resist 
those thievish tendencies which would seem, for some undiscovered 
reason, to be almost inseparable from that branch of traffic.  In 
all matters they hold their own course quietly, live in their 
gloomy, silent commonwealth, and show little desire to interfere 
with other people.

This is well enough, but nevertheless I cannot, I confess, incline 
towards the Shakers; view them with much favour, or extend towards 
them any very lenient construction.  I so abhor, and from my soul 
detest that bad spirit, no matter by what class or sect it may be 
entertained, which would strip life of its healthful graces, rob 
youth of its innocent pleasures, pluck from maturity and age their 
pleasant ornaments, and make existence but a narrow path towards 
the grave:  that odious spirit which, if it could have had full 
scope and sway upon the earth, must have blasted and made barren 
the imaginations of the greatest men, and left them, in their power 
of raising up enduring images before their fellow-creatures yet 
unborn, no better than the beasts:  that, in these very broad-
brimmed hats and very sombre coats - in stiff-necked, solemn-
visaged piety, in short, no matter what its garb, whether it have 
cropped hair as in a Shaker village, or long nails as in a Hindoo 
temple - I recognise the worst among the enemies of Heaven and 
Earth, who turn the water at the marriage feasts of this poor 
world, not into wine, but gall.  And if there must be people vowed 
to crush the harmless fancies and the love of innocent delights and 
gaieties, which are a part of human nature:  as much a part of it 
as any other love or hope that is our common portion:  let them, 
for me, stand openly revealed among the ribald and licentious; the 
very idiots know that THEY are not on the Immortal road, and will 
despise them, and avoid them readily.

Leaving the Shaker village with a hearty dislike of the old 
Shakers, and a hearty pity for the young ones:  tempered by the 
strong probability of their running away as they grow older and 
wiser, which they not uncommonly do:  we returned to Lebanon, and 
so to Hudson, by the way we had come upon the previous day.  There, 
we took the steamboat down the North River towards New York, but 
stopped, some four hours' journey short of it, at West Point, where 
we remained that night, and all next day, and next night too.

In this beautiful place:  the fairest among the fair and lovely 
Highlands of the North River:  shut in by deep green heights and 
ruined forts, and looking down upon the distant town of Newburgh, 
along a glittering path of sunlit water, with here and there a 
skiff, whose white sail often bends on some new tack as sudden 
flaws of wind come down upon her from the gullies in the hills:  
hemmed in, besides, all round with memories of Washington, and 
events of the revolutionary war:  is the Military School of 
America.

It could not stand on more appropriate ground, and any ground more 
beautiful can hardly be.  The course of education is severe, but 
well devised, and manly.  Through June, July, and August, the young 
men encamp upon the spacious plain whereon the college stands; and 
all the year their military exercises are performed there, daily.  
The term of study at this institution, which the State requires 
from all cadets, is four years; but, whether it be from the rigid 
nature of the discipline, or the national impatience of restraint, 
or both causes combined, not more than half the number who begin 
their studies here, ever remain to finish them.

The number of cadets being about equal to that of the members of 
Congress, one is sent here from every Congressional district:  its 
member influencing the selection.  Commissions in the service are 
distributed on the same principle.  The dwellings of the various 
Professors are beautifully situated; and there is a most excellent 
hotel for strangers, though it has the two drawbacks of being a 
total abstinence house (wines and spirits being forbidden to the 
students), and of serving the public meals at rather uncomfortable 
hours:  to wit, breakfast at seven, dinner at one, and supper at 
sunset.

The beauty and freshness of this calm retreat, in the very dawn and 
greenness of summer - it was then the beginning of June - were 
exquisite indeed.  Leaving it upon the sixth, and returning to New 
York, to embark for England on the succeeding day, I was glad to 
think that among the last memorable beauties which had glided past 
us, and softened in the bright perspective, were those whose 
pictures, traced by no common hand, are fresh in most men's minds; 
not easily to grow old, or fade beneath the dust of Time:  the 
Kaatskill Mountains, Sleepy Hollow, and the Tappaan Zee.



CHAPTER XVI - THE PASSAGE HOME



I NEVER had so much interest before, and very likely I shall never 
have so much interest again, in the state of the wind, as on the 
long-looked-for morning of Tuesday the Seventh of June.  Some 
nautical authority had told me a day or two previous, 'anything 
with west in it, will do;' so when I darted out of bed at daylight, 
and throwing up the window, was saluted by a lively breeze from the 
north-west which had sprung up in the night, it came upon me so 
freshly, rustling with so many happy associations, that I conceived 
upon the spot a special regard for all airs blowing from that 
quarter of the compass, which I shall cherish, I dare say, until my 
own wind has breathed its last frail puff, and withdrawn itself for 
ever from the mortal calendar.

The pilot had not been slow to take advantage of this favourable 
weather, and the ship which yesterday had been in such a crowded 
dock that she might have retired from trade for good and all, for 
any chance she seemed to have of going to sea, was now full sixteen 
miles away.  A gallant sight she was, when we, fast gaining on her 
in a steamboat, saw her in the distance riding at anchor:  her tall 
masts pointing up in graceful lines against the sky, and every rope 
and spar expressed in delicate and thread-like outline:  gallant, 
too, when, we being all aboard, the anchor came up to the sturdy 
chorus 'Cheerily men, oh cheerily!' and she followed proudly in the 
towing steamboat's wake:  but bravest and most gallant of all, when 
the tow-rope being cast adrift, the canvas fluttered from her 
masts, and spreading her white wings she soared away upon her free 
and solitary course.

In the after cabin we were only fifteen passengers in all, and the 
greater part were from Canada, where some of us had known each 
other.  The night was rough and squally, so were the next two days, 
but they flew by quickly, and we were soon as cheerful and snug a 
party, with an honest, manly-hearted captain at our head, as ever 
came to the resolution of being mutually agreeable, on land or 
water.

We breakfasted at eight, lunched at twelve, dined at three, and 
took our tea at half-past seven.  We had abundance of amusements, 
and dinner was not the least among them:  firstly, for its own 
sake; secondly, because of its extraordinary length:  its duration, 
inclusive of all the long pauses between the courses, being seldom 
less than two hours and a half; which was a subject of never-
failing entertainment.  By way of beguiling the tediousness of 
these banquets, a select association was formed at the lower end of 
the table, below the mast, to whose distinguished president modesty 
forbids me to make any further allusion, which, being a very 
hilarious and jovial institution, was (prejudice apart) in high 
favour with the rest of the community, and particularly with a 
black steward, who lived for three weeks in a broad grin at the 
marvellous humour of these incorporated worthies.

Then, we had chess for those who played it, whist, cribbage, books, 
backgammon, and shovelboard.  In all weathers, fair or foul, calm 
or windy, we were every one on deck, walking up and down in pairs, 
lying in the boats, leaning over the side, or chatting in a lazy 
group together.  We had no lack of music, for one played the 
accordion, another the violin, and another (who usually began at 
six o'clock A.M.) the key-bugle:  the combined effect of which 
instruments, when they all played different tunes in differents 
parts of the ship, at the same time, and within hearing of each 
other, as they sometimes did (everybody being intensely satisfied 
with his own performance), was sublimely hideous.

When all these means of entertainment failed, a sail would heave in 
sight:  looming, perhaps, the very spirit of a ship, in the misty 
distance, or passing us so close that through our glasses we could 
see the people on her decks, and easily make out her name, and 
whither she was bound.  For hours together we could watch the 
dolphins and porpoises as they rolled and leaped and dived around 
the vessel; or those small creatures ever on the wing, the Mother 
Carey's chickens, which had borne us company from New York bay, and 
for a whole fortnight fluttered about the vessel's stern.  For some 
days we had a dead calm, or very light winds, during which the crew 
amused themselves with fishing, and hooked an unlucky dolphin, who 
expired, in all his rainbow colours, on the deck:  an event of such 
importance in our barren calendar, that afterwards we dated from 
the dolphin, and made the day on which he died, an era.

Besides all this, when we were five or six days out, there began to 
be much talk of icebergs, of which wandering islands an unusual 
number had been seen by the vessels that had come into New York a 
day or two before we left that port, and of whose dangerous 
neighbourhood we were warned by the sudden coldness of the weather, 
and the sinking of the mercury in the barometer.  While these 
tokens lasted, a double look-out was kept, and many dismal tales 
were whispered after dark, of ships that had struck upon the ice 
and gone down in the night; but the wind obliging us to hold a 
southward course, we saw none of them, and the weather soon grew 
bright and warm again.

The observation every day at noon, and the subsequent working of 
the vessel's course, was, as may be supposed, a feature in our 
lives of paramount importance; nor were there wanting (as there 
never are) sagacious doubters of the captain's calculations, who, 
so soon as his back was turned, would, in the absence of compasses, 
measure the chart with bits of string, and ends of pocket-
handkerchiefs, and points of snuffers, and clearly prove him to be 
wrong by an odd thousand miles or so.  It was very edifying to see 
these unbelievers shake their heads and frown, and hear them hold 
forth strongly upon navigation:  not that they knew anything about 
it, but that they always mistrusted the captain in calm weather, or 
when the wind was adverse.  Indeed, the mercury itself is not so 
variable as this class of passengers, whom you will see, when the 
ship is going nobly through the water, quite pale with admiration, 
swearing that the captain beats all captains ever known, and even 
hinting at subscriptions for a piece of plate; and who, next 
morning, when the breeze has lulled, and all the sails hang useless 
in the idle air, shake their despondent heads again, and say, with 
screwed-up lips, they hope that captain is a sailor - but they 
shrewdly doubt him.

It even became an occupation in the calm, to wonder when the wind 
WOULD spring up in the favourable quarter, where, it was clearly 
shown by all the rules and precedents, it ought to have sprung up 
long ago.  The first mate, who whistled for it zealously, was much 
respected for his perseverance, and was regarded even by the 
unbelievers as a first-rate sailor.  Many gloomy looks would be 
cast upward through the cabin skylights at the flapping sails while 
dinner was in progress; and some, growing bold in ruefulness, 
predicted that we should land about the middle of July.  There are 
always on board ship, a Sanguine One, and a Despondent One.  The 
latter character carried it hollow at this period of the voyage, 
and triumphed over the Sanguine One at every meal, by inquiring 
where he supposed the Great Western (which left New York a week 
after us) was NOW:  and where he supposed the 'Cunard' steam-packet 
was NOW:  and what he thought of sailing vessels, as compared with 
steamships NOW:  and so beset his life with pestilent attacks of 
that kind, that he too was obliged to affect despondency, for very 
peace and quietude.

These were additions to the list of entertaining incidents, but 
there was still another source of interest.  We carried in the 
steerage nearly a hundred passengers:  a little world of poverty:  
and as we came to know individuals among them by sight, from 
looking down upon the deck where they took the air in the daytime, 
and cooked their food, and very often ate it too, we became curious 
to know their histories, and with what expectations they had gone 
out to America, and on what errands they were going home, and what 
their circumstances were.  The information we got on these heads 
from the carpenter, who had charge of these people, was often of 
the strangest kind.  Some of them had been in America but three 
days, some but three months, and some had gone out in the last 
voyage of that very ship in which they were now returning home.  
Others had sold their clothes to raise the passage-money, and had 
hardly rags to cover them; others had no food, and lived upon the 
charity of the rest:  and one man, it was discovered nearly at the 
end of the voyage, not before - for he kept his secret close, and 
did not court compassion - had had no sustenance whatever but the 
bones and scraps of fat he took from the plates used in the after-
cabin dinner, when they were put out to be washed.

The whole system of shipping and conveying these unfortunate 
persons, is one that stands in need of thorough revision.  If any 
class deserve to be protected and assisted by the Government, it is 
that class who are banished from their native land in search of the 
bare means of subsistence.  All that could be done for these poor 
people by the great compassion and humanity of the captain and 
officers was done, but they require much more.  The law is bound, 
at least upon the English side, to see that too many of them are 
not put on board one ship:  and that their accommodations are 
decent:  not demoralising, and profligate.  It is bound, too, in 
common humanity, to declare that no man shall be taken on board 
without his stock of provisions being previously inspected by some 
proper officer, and pronounced moderately sufficient for his 
support upon the voyage.  It is bound to provide, or to require 
that there be provided, a medical attendant; whereas in these ships 
there are none, though sickness of adults, and deaths of children, 
on the passage, are matters of the very commonest occurrence.  
Above all it is the duty of any Government, be it monarchy or 
republic, to interpose and put an end to that system by which a 
firm of traders in emigrants purchase of the owners the whole 
'tween-decks of a ship, and send on board as many wretched people 
as they can lay hold of, on any terms they can get, without the 
smallest reference to the conveniences of the steerage, the number 
of berths, the slightest separation of the sexes, or anything but 
their own immediate profit.  Nor is even this the worst of the 
vicious system:  for, certain crimping agents of these houses, who 
have a percentage on all the passengers they inveigle, are 
constantly travelling about those districts where poverty and 
discontent are rife, and tempting the credulous into more misery, 
by holding out monstrous inducements to emigration which can never 
be realised.

The history of every family we had on board was pretty much the 
same.  After hoarding up, and borrowing, and begging, and selling 
everything to pay the passage, they had gone out to New York, 
expecting to find its streets paved with gold; and had found them 
paved with very hard and very real stones.  Enterprise was dull; 
labourers were not wanted; jobs of work were to be got, but the 
payment was not.  They were coming back, even poorer than they 
went.  One of them was carrying an open letter from a young English 
artisan, who had been in New York a fortnight, to a friend near 
Manchester, whom he strongly urged to follow him.  One of the 
officers brought it to me as a curiosity.  'This is the country, 
Jem,' said the writer.  'I like America.  There is no despotism 
here; that's the great thing.  Employment of all sorts is going a-
begging, and wages are capital.  You have only to choose a trade, 
Jem, and be it.  I haven't made choice of one yet, but I shall 
soon.  AT PRESENT I HAVEN'T QUITE MADE UP MY MIND WHETHER TO BE A 
CARPENTER - OR A TAILOR.'

There was yet another kind of passenger, and but one more, who, in 
the calm and the light winds, was a constant theme of conversation 
and observation among us.  This was an English sailor, a smart, 
thorough-built, English man-of-war's-man from his hat to his shoes, 
who was serving in the American navy, and having got leave of 
absence was on his way home to see his friends.  When he presented 
himself to take and pay for his passage, it had been suggested to 
him that being an able seaman he might as well work it and save the 
money, but this piece of advice he very indignantly rejected:  
saying, 'He'd be damned but for once he'd go aboard ship, as a 
gentleman.'  Accordingly, they took his money, but he no sooner 
came aboard, than he stowed his kit in the forecastle, arranged to 
mess with the crew, and the very first time the hands were turned 
up, went aloft like a cat, before anybody.  And all through the 
passage there he was, first at the braces, outermost on the yards, 
perpetually lending a hand everywhere, but always with a sober 
dignity in his manner, and a sober grin on his face, which plainly 
said, 'I do it as a gentleman.  For my own pleasure, mind you!'

At length and at last, the promised wind came up in right good 
earnest, and away we went before it, with every stitch of canvas 
set, slashing through the water nobly.  There was a grandeur in the 
motion of the splendid ship, as overshadowed by her mass of sails, 
she rode at a furious pace upon the waves, which filled one with an 
indescribable sense of pride and exultation.  As she plunged into a 
foaming valley, how I loved to see the green waves, bordered deep 
with white, come rushing on astern, to buoy her upward at their 
pleasure, and curl about her as she stooped again, but always own 
her for their haughty mistress still!  On, on we flew, with 
changing lights upon the water, being now in the blessed region of 
fleecy skies; a bright sun lighting us by day, and a bright moon by 
night; the vane pointing directly homeward, alike the truthful 
index to the favouring wind and to our cheerful hearts; until at 
sunrise, one fair Monday morning - the twenty-seventh of June, I 
shall not easily forget the day - there lay before us, old Cape 
Clear, God bless it, showing, in the mist of early morning, like a 
cloud:  the brightest and most welcome cloud, to us, that ever hid 
the face of Heaven's fallen sister - Home.

Dim speck as it was in the wide prospect, it made the sunrise a 
more cheerful sight, and gave to it that sort of human interest 
which it seems to want at sea.  There, as elsewhere, the return of 
day is inseparable from some sense of renewed hope and gladness; 
but the light shining on the dreary waste of water, and showing it 
in all its vast extent of loneliness, presents a solemn spectacle, 
which even night, veiling it in darkness and uncertainty, does not 
surpass.  The rising of the moon is more in keeping with the 
solitary ocean; and has an air of melancholy grandeur, which in its 
soft and gentle influence, seems to comfort while it saddens.  I 
recollect when I was a very young child having a fancy that the 
reflection of the moon in water was a path to Heaven, trodden by 
the spirits of good people on their way to God; and this old 
feeling often came over me again, when I watched it on a tranquil 
night at sea.

The wind was very light on this same Monday morning, but it was 
still in the right quarter, and so, by slow degrees, we left Cape 
Clear behind, and sailed along within sight of the coast of 
Ireland.  And how merry we all were, and how loyal to the George 
Washington, and how full of mutual congratulations, and how 
venturesome in predicting the exact hour at which we should arrive 
at Liverpool, may be easily imagined and readily understood.  Also, 
how heartily we drank the captain's health that day at dinner; and 
how restless we became about packing up:  and how two or three of 
the most sanguine spirits rejected the idea of going to bed at all 
that night as something it was not worth while to do, so near the 
shore, but went nevertheless, and slept soundly; and how to be so 
near our journey's end, was like a pleasant dream, from which one 
feared to wake.

The friendly breeze freshened again next day, and on we went once 
more before it gallantly:  descrying now and then an English ship 
going homeward under shortened sail, while we, with every inch of 
canvas crowded on, dashed gaily past, and left her far behind.  
Towards evening, the weather turned hazy, with a drizzling rain; 
and soon became so thick, that we sailed, as it were, in a cloud.  
Still we swept onward like a phantom ship, and many an eager eye 
glanced up to where the Look-out on the mast kept watch for 
Holyhead.

At length his long-expected cry was heard, and at the same moment 
there shone out from the haze and mist ahead, a gleaming light, 
which presently was gone, and soon returned, and soon was gone 
again.  Whenever it came back, the eyes of all on board, brightened 
and sparkled like itself:  and there we all stood, watching this 
revolving light upon the rock at Holyhead, and praising it for its 
brightness and its friendly warning, and lauding it, in short, 
above all other signal lights that ever were displayed, until it 
once more glimmered faintly in the distance, far behind us.

Then, it was time to fire a gun, for a pilot; and almost before its 
smoke had cleared away, a little boat with a light at her masthead 
came bearing down upon us, through the darkness, swiftly.  And 
presently, our sails being backed, she ran alongside; and the 
hoarse pilot, wrapped and muffled in pea-coats and shawls to the 
very bridge of his weather-ploughed-up nose, stood bodily among us 
on the deck.  And I think if that pilot had wanted to borrow fifty 
pounds for an indefinite period on no security, we should have 
engaged to lend it to him, among us, before his boat had dropped 
astern, or (which is the same thing) before every scrap of news in 
the paper he brought with him had become the common property of all 
on board.

We turned in pretty late that night, and turned out pretty early 
next morning.  By six o'clock we clustered on the deck, prepared to 
go ashore; and looked upon the spires, and roofs, and smoke, of 
Liverpool.  By eight we all sat down in one of its Hotels, to eat 
and drink together for the last time.  And by nine we had shaken 
hands all round, and broken up our social company for ever.

The country, by the railroad, seemed, as we rattled through it, 
like a luxuriant garden.  The beauty of the fields (so small they 
looked!), the hedge-rows, and the trees; the pretty cottages, the 
beds of flowers, the old churchyards, the antique houses, and every 
well-known object; the exquisite delights of that one journey, 
crowding in the short compass of a summer's day, the joy of many 
years, with the winding up with Home and all that makes it dear; no 
tongue can tell, or pen of mine describe.



CHAPTER XVI - SLAVERY



THE upholders of slavery in America - of the atrocities of which 
system, I shall not write one word for which I have not had ample 
proof and warrant - may be divided into three great classes.

The first, are those more moderate and rational owners of human 
cattle, who have come into the possession of them as so many coins 
in their trading capital, but who admit the frightful nature of the 
Institution in the abstract, and perceive the dangers to society 
with which it is fraught:  dangers which however distant they may 
be, or howsoever tardy in their coming on, are as certain to fall 
upon its guilty head, as is the Day of Judgment.

The second, consists of all those owners, breeders, users, buyers 
and sellers of slaves, who will, until the bloody chapter has a 
bloody end, own, breed, use, buy, and sell them at all hazards:  
who doggedly deny the horrors of the system in the teeth of such a 
mass of evidence as never was brought to bear on any other subject, 
and to which the experience of every day contributes its immense 
amount; who would at this or any other moment, gladly involve 
America in a war, civil or foreign, provided that it had for its 
sole end and object the assertion of their right to perpetuate 
slavery, and to whip and work and torture slaves, unquestioned by 
any human authority, and unassailed by any human power; who, when 
they speak of Freedom, mean the Freedom to oppress their kind, and 
to be savage, merciless, and cruel; and of whom every man on his 
own ground, in republican America, is a more exacting, and a 
sterner, and a less responsible despot than the Caliph Haroun 
Alraschid in his angry robe of scarlet.

The third, and not the least numerous or influential, is composed 
of all that delicate gentility which cannot bear a superior, and 
cannot brook an equal; of that class whose Republicanism means, 'I 
will not tolerate a man above me:  and of those below, none must 
approach too near;' whose pride, in a land where voluntary 
servitude is shunned as a disgrace, must be ministered to by 
slaves; and whose inalienable rights can only have their growth in 
negro wrongs.

It has been sometimes urged that, in the unavailing efforts which 
have been made to advance the cause of Human Freedom in the 
republic of America (strange cause for history to treat of!), 
sufficient regard has not been had to the existence of the first 
class of persons; and it has been contended that they are hardly 
used, in being confounded with the second.  This is, no doubt, the 
case; noble instances of pecuniary and personal sacrifice have 
already had their growth among them; and it is much to be regretted 
that the gulf between them and the advocates of emancipation should 
have been widened and deepened by any means:  the rather, as there 
are, beyond dispute, among these slave-owners, many kind masters 
who are tender in the exercise of their unnatural power.  Still, it 
is to be feared that this injustice is inseparable from the state 
of things with which humanity and truth are called upon to deal.  
Slavery is not a whit the more endurable because some hearts are to 
be found which can partially resist its hardening influences; nor 
can the indignant tide of honest wrath stand still, because in its 
onward course it overwhelms a few who are comparatively innocent, 
among a host of guilty.

The ground most commonly taken by these better men among the 
advocates of slavery, is this:  'It is a bad system; and for myself 
I would willingly get rid of it, if I could; most willingly.  But 
it is not so bad, as you in England take it to be.  You are 
deceived by the representations of the emancipationists.  The 
greater part of my slaves are much attached to me.  You will say 
that I do not allow them to be severely treated; but I will put it 
to you whether you believe that it can be a general practice to 
treat them inhumanly, when it would impair their value, and would 
be obviously against the interests of their masters.'

Is it the interest of any man to steal, to game, to waste his 
health and mental faculties by drunkenness, to lie, forswear 
himself, indulge hatred, seek desperate revenge, or do murder?  No.  
All these are roads to ruin.  And why, then, do men tread them?  
Because such inclinations are among the vicious qualities of 
mankind.  Blot out, ye friends of slavery, from the catalogue of 
human passions, brutal lust, cruelty, and the abuse of 
irresponsible power (of all earthly temptations the most difficult 
to be resisted), and when ye have done so, and not before, we will 
inquire whether it be the interest of a master to lash and maim the 
slaves, over whose lives and limbs he has an absolute control!

But again:  this class, together with that last one I have named, 
the miserable aristocracy spawned of a false republic, lift up 
their voices and exclaim 'Public opinion is all-sufficient to 
prevent such cruelty as you denounce.'  Public opinion!  Why, 
public opinion in the slave States IS slavery, is it not?  Public 
opinion, in the slave States, has delivered the slaves over, to the 
gentle mercies of their masters.  Public opinion has made the laws, 
and denied the slaves legislative protection.  Public opinion has 
knotted the lash, heated the branding-iron, loaded the rifle, and 
shielded the murderer.  Public opinion threatens the abolitionist 
with death, if he venture to the South; and drags him with a rope 
about his middle, in broad unblushing noon, through the first city 
in the East.  Public opinion has, within a few years, burned a 
slave alive at a slow fire in the city of St. Louis; and public 
opinion has to this day maintained upon the bench that estimable 
judge who charged the jury, impanelled there to try his murderers, 
that their most horrid deed was an act of public opinion, and being 
so, must not be punished by the laws the public sentiment had made.  
Public opinion hailed this doctrine with a howl of wild applause, 
and set the prisoners free, to walk the city, men of mark, and 
influence, and station, as they had been before.

Public opinion! what class of men have an immense preponderance 
over the rest of the community, in their power of representing 
public opinion in the legislature? the slave-owners.  They send 
from their twelve States one hundred members, while the fourteen 
free States, with a free population nearly double, return but a 
hundred and forty-two.  Before whom do the presidential candidates 
bow down the most humbly, on whom do they fawn the most fondly, and 
for whose tastes do they cater the most assiduously in their 
servile protestations?  The slave-owners always.

Public opinion! hear the public opinion of the free South, as 
expressed by its own members in the House of Representatives at 
Washington.  'I have a great respect for the chair,' quoth North 
Carolina, 'I have a great respect for the chair as an officer of 
the house, and a great respect for him personally; nothing but that 
respect prevents me from rushing to the table and tearing that 
petition which has just been presented for the abolition of slavery 
in the district of Columbia, to pieces.' - 'I warn the 
abolitionists,' says South Carolina, 'ignorant, infuriated 
barbarians as they are, that if chance shall throw any of them into 
our hands, he may expect a felon's death.' - 'Let an abolitionist 
come within the borders of South Carolina,' cries a third; mild 
Carolina's colleague; 'and if we can catch him, we will try him, 
and notwithstanding the interference of all the governments on 
earth, including the Federal government, we will HANG him.'

Public opinion has made this law. - It has declared that in 
Washington, in that city which takes its name from the father of 
American liberty, any justice of the peace may bind with fetters 
any negro passing down the street and thrust him into jail:  no 
offence on the black man's part is necessary.  The justice says, 'I 
choose to think this man a runaway:' and locks him up.  Public 
opinion impowers the man of law when this is done, to advertise the 
negro in the newspapers, warning his owner to come and claim him, 
or he will be sold to pay the jail fees.  But supposing he is a 
free black, and has no owner, it may naturally be presumed that he 
is set at liberty.  No:  HE IS SOLD TO RECOMPENSE HIS JAILER.  This 
has been done again, and again, and again.  He has no means of 
proving his freedom; has no adviser, messenger, or assistance of 
any sort or kind; no investigation into his case is made, or 
inquiry instituted.  He, a free man, who may have served for years, 
and bought his liberty, is thrown into jail on no process, for no 
crime, and on no pretence of crime:  and is sold to pay the jail 
fees.  This seems incredible, even of America, but it is the law.

Public opinion is deferred to, in such cases as the following:  
which is headed in the newspapers:-


'INTERESTING LAW-CASE.

'An interesting case is now on trial in the Supreme Court, arising 
out of the following facts.  A gentleman residing in Maryland had 
allowed an aged pair of his slaves, substantial though not legal 
freedom for several years.  While thus living, a daughter was born 
to them, who grew up in the same liberty, until she married a free 
negro, and went with him to reside in Pennsylvania.  They had 
several children, and lived unmolested until the original owner 
died, when his heir attempted to regain them; but the magistrate 
before whom they were brought, decided that he had no jurisdiction 
in the case.  THE OWNER SEIZED THE WOMAN AND HER CHILDREN ITS THE 
NIGHT, AND CARRIED THEM TO MARYLAND.'


'Cash for negroes,' 'cash for negroes,' 'cash for negroes,' is the 
heading of advertisements in great capitals down the long columns 
of the crowded journals.  Woodcuts of a runaway negro with manacled 
hands, crouching beneath a bluff pursuer in top boots, who, having 
caught him, grasps him by the throat, agreeably diversify the 
pleasant text.  The leading article protests against 'that 
abominable and hellish doctrine of abolition, which is repugnant 
alike to every law of God and nature.'  The delicate mamma, who 
smiles her acquiescence in this sprightly writing as she reads the 
paper in her cool piazza, quiets her youngest child who clings 
about her skirts, by promising the boy 'a whip to beat the little 
niggers with.' - But the negroes, little and big, are protected by 
public opinion.

Let us try this public opinion by another test, which is important 
in three points of view:  first, as showing how desperately timid 
of the public opinion slave-owners are, in their delicate 
descriptions of fugitive slaves in widely circulated newspapers; 
secondly, as showing how perfectly contented the slaves are, and 
how very seldom they run away; thirdly, as exhibiting their entire 
freedom from scar, or blemish, or any mark of cruel infliction, as 
their pictures are drawn, not by lying abolitionists, but by their 
own truthful masters.

The following are a few specimens of the advertisements in the 
public papers.  It is only four years since the oldest among them 
appeared; and others of the same nature continue to be published 
every day, in shoals.

'Ran away, Negress Caroline.  Had on a collar with one prong turned 
down.'

'Ran away, a black woman, Betsy.  Had an iron bar on her right 
leg.'

'Ran away, the negro Manuel.  Much marked with irons.'

'Ran away, the negress Fanny.  Had on an iron band about her neck.'

'Ran away, a negro boy about twelve years old.  Had round his neck 
a chain dog-collar with "De Lampert" engraved on it.'

'Ran away, the negro Hown.  Has a ring of iron on his left foot.  
Also, Grise, HIS WIFE, having a ring and chain on the left leg.'

'Ran away, a negro boy named James.  Said boy was ironed when he 
left me.'

'Committed to jail, a man who calls his name John.  He has a clog 
of iron on his right foot which will weigh four or five pounds.'

'Detained at the police jail, the negro wench, Myra.  Has several 
marks of LASHING, and has irons on her feet.'

'Ran away, a negro woman and two children.  A few days before she 
went off, I burnt her with a hot iron, on the left side of her 
face.  I tried to make the letter M.'

'Ran away, a negro man named Henry; his left eye out, some scars 
from a dirk on and under his left arm, and much scarred with the 
whip.'

'One hundred dollars reward, for a negro fellow, Pompey, 40 years 
old.  He is branded on the left jaw.'

'Committed to jail, a negro man.  Has no toes on the left foot.'

'Ran away, a negro woman named Rachel.  Has lost all her toes 
except the large one.'

'Ran away, Sam.  He was shot a short time since through the hand, 
and has several shots in his left arm and side.'

'Ran away, my negro man Dennis.  Said negro has been shot in the 
left arm between the shoulder and elbow, which has paralysed the 
left hand.'

'Ran away, my negro man named Simon.  He has been shot badly, in 
his back and right arm.'

'Ran away, a negro named Arthur.  Has a considerable scar across 
his breast and each arm, made by a knife; loves to talk much of the 
goodness of God.'

'Twenty-five dollars reward for my man Isaac.  He has a scar on his 
forehead, caused by a blow; and one on his back, made by a shot 
from a pistol.'

'Ran away, a negro girl called Mary.  Has a small scar over her 
eye, a good many teeth missing, the letter A is branded on her 
cheek and forehead.'

'Ran away, negro Ben.  Has a scar on his right hand; his thumb and 
forefinger being injured by being shot last fall.  A part of the 
bone came out.  He has also one or two large scars on his back and 
hips.'

'Detained at the jail, a mulatto, named Tom.  Has a scar on the 
right cheek, and appears to have been burned with powder on the 
face.'

'Ran away, a negro man named Ned.  Three of his fingers are drawn 
into the palm of his hand by a cut.  Has a scar on the back of his 
neck, nearly half round, done by a knife.'

'Was committed to jail, a negro man.  Says his name is Josiah.  His 
back very much scarred by the whip; and branded on the thigh and 
hips in three or four places, thus (J M).  The rim of his right ear 
has been bit or cut off.'

'Fifty dollars reward, for my fellow Edward.  He has a scar on the 
corner of his mouth, two cuts on and under his arm, and the letter 
E on his arm.'

'Ran away, negro boy Ellie.  Has a scar on one of his arms from the 
bite of a dog.'

'Ran away, from the plantation of James Surgette, the following 
negroes:  Randal, has one ear cropped; Bob, has lost one eye; 
Kentucky Tom, has one jaw broken.'

'Ran away, Anthony.  One of his ears cut off, and his left hand cut 
with an axe.'

'Fifty dollars reward for the negro Jim Blake.  Has a piece cut out 
of each ear, and the middle finger of the left hand cut off to the 
second joint.'

'Ran away, a negro woman named Maria.  Has a scar on one side of 
her cheek, by a cut.  Some scars on her back.'

'Ran away, the Mulatto wench Mary.  Has a cut on the left arm, a 
scar on the left shoulder, and two upper teeth missing.'

I should say, perhaps, in explanation of this latter piece of 
description, that among the other blessings which public opinion 
secures to the negroes, is the common practice of violently 
punching out their teeth.  To make them wear iron collars by day 
and night, and to worry them with dogs, are practices almost too 
ordinary to deserve mention.

'Ran away, my man Fountain.  Has holes in his ears, a scar on the 
right side of his forehead, has been shot in the hind part of his 
legs, and is marked on the back with the whip.'

'Two hundred and fifty dollars reward for my negro man Jim.  He is 
much marked with shot in his right thigh.  The shot entered on the 
outside, halfway between the hip and knee joints.'

'Brought to jail, John.  Left ear cropt.'

'Taken up, a negro man.  Is very much scarred about the face and 
body, and has the left ear bit off.'

'Ran away, a black girl, named Mary.  Has a scar on her cheek, and 
the end of one of her toes cut off.'

'Ran away, my Mulatto woman, Judy.  She has had her right arm 
broke.'

'Ran away, my negro man, Levi.  His left hand has been burnt, and I 
think the end of his forefinger is off.'

'Ran away, a negro man, NAMED WASHINGTON.  Has lost a part of his 
middle finger, and the end of his little finger.'

'Twenty-five dollars reward for my man John.  The tip of his nose 
is bit off.'

'Twenty-five dollars reward for the negro slave, Sally.  Walks AS 
THOUGH crippled in the back.'

'Ran away, Joe Dennis.  Has a small notch in one of his ears.'

'Ran away, negro boy, Jack.  Has a small crop out of his left ear.'

'Ran away, a negro man, named Ivory.  Has a small piece cut out of 
the top of each ear.'

While upon the subject of ears, I may observe that a distinguished 
abolitionist in New York once received a negro's ear, which had 
been cut off close to the head, in a general post letter.  It was 
forwarded by the free and independent gentleman who had caused it 
to be amputated, with a polite request that he would place the 
specimen in his 'collection.'

I could enlarge this catalogue with broken arms, and broken legs, 
and gashed flesh, and missing teeth, and lacerated backs, and bites 
of dogs, and brands of red-hot irons innumerable:  but as my 
readers will be sufficiently sickened and repelled already, I will 
turn to another branch of the subject.

These advertisements, of which a similar collection might be made 
for every year, and month, and week, and day; and which are coolly 
read in families as things of course, and as a part of the current 
news and small-talk; will serve to show how very much the slaves 
profit by public opinion, and how tender it is in their behalf.  
But it may be worth while to inquire how the slave-owners, and the 
class of society to which great numbers of them belong, defer to 
public opinion in their conduct, not to their slaves but to each 
other; how they are accustomed to restrain their passions; what 
their bearing is among themselves; whether they are fierce or 
gentle; whether their social customs be brutal, sanguinary, and 
violent, or bear the impress of civilisation and refinement.

That we may have no partial evidence from abolitionists in this 
inquiry, either, I will once more turn to their own newspapers, and 
I will confine myself, this time, to a selection from paragraphs 
which appeared from day to day, during my visit to America, and 
which refer to occurrences happening while I was there.  The 
italics in these extracts, as in the foregoing, are my own.

These cases did not ALL occur, it will be seen, in territory 
actually belonging to legalised Slave States, though most, and 
those the very worst among them did, as their counterparts 
constantly do; but the position of the scenes of action in 
reference to places immediately at hand, where slavery is the law; 
and the strong resemblance between that class of outrages and the 
rest; lead to the just presumption that the character of the 
parties concerned was formed in slave districts, and brutalised by 
slave customs.


'HORRIBLE TRAGEDY.


'By a slip from THE SOUTHPORT TELEGRAPH, Wisconsin, we learn that 
the Hon. Charles C. P. Arndt, Member of the Council for Brown 
county, was shot dead ON THE FLOOR OF THE COUNCIL CHAMBER, by James 
R. Vinyard, Member from Grant county.  THE AFFAIR grew out of a 
nomination for Sheriff of Grant county.  Mr. E. S. Baker was 
nominated and supported by Mr. Arndt.  This nomination was opposed 
by Vinyard, who wanted the appointment to vest in his own brother.  
In the course of debate, the deceased made some statements which 
Vinyard pronounced false, and made use of violent and insulting 
language, dealing largely in personalities, to which Mr. A. made no 
reply.  After the adjournment, Mr. A. stepped up to Vinyard, and 
requested him to retract, which he refused to do, repeating the 
offensive words.  Mr. Arndt then made a blow at Vinyard, who 
stepped back a pace, drew a pistol, and shot him dead.

'The issue appears to have been provoked on the part of Vinyard, 
who was determined at all hazards to defeat the appointment of 
Baker, and who, himself defeated, turned his ire and revenge upon 
the unfortunate Arndt.'


'THE WISCONSIN TRAGEDY.


Public indignation runs high in the territory of Wisconsin, in 
relation to the murder of C. C. P. Arndt, in the Legislative Hall 
of the Territory.  Meetings have been held in different counties of 
Wisconsin, denouncing THE PRACTICE OF SECRETLY BEARING ARMS IN THE 
LEGISLATIVE CHAMBERS OF THE COUNTRY.  We have seen the account of 
the expulsion of James R. Vinyard, the perpetrator of the bloody 
deed, and are amazed to hear, that, after this expulsion by those 
who saw Vinyard kill Mr. Arndt in the presence of his aged father, 
who was on a visit to see his son, little dreaming that he was to 
witness his murder, JUDGE DUNN HAS DISCHARGED VINYARD ON BAIL.  The 
Miners' Free Press speaks IN TERMS OF MERITED REBUKE at the outrage 
upon the feelings of the people of Wisconsin.  Vinyard was within 
arm's length of Mr. Arndt, when he took such deadly aim at him, 
that he never spoke.  Vinyard might at pleasure, being so near, 
have only wounded him, but he chose to kill him.'


'MURDER.


By a letter in a St. Louis paper of the '4th, we notice a terrible 
outrage at Burlington, Iowa.  A Mr. Bridgman having had a 
difficulty with a citizen of the place, Mr. Ross; a brother-in-law 
of the latter provided himself with one of Colt's revolving 
pistols, met Mr. B. in the street, AND DISCHARGED THE CONTENTS OF 
FIVE OF THE BARRELS AT HIM:  EACH SHOT TAKING EFFECT.  Mr. B., 
though horribly wounded, and dying, returned the fire, and killed 
Ross on the spot.'


'TERRIBLE DEATH OF ROBERT POTTER.


'From the "Caddo Gazette," of the 12th inst., we learn the 
frightful death of Colonel Robert Potter. . . . He was beset in his 
house by an enemy, named Rose.  He sprang from his couch, seized 
his gun, and, in his night-clothes, rushed from the house.  For 
about two hundred yards his speed seemed to defy his pursuers; but, 
getting entangled in a thicket, he was captured.  Rose told him 
THAT HE INTENDED TO ACT A GENEROUS PART, and give him a chance for 
his life.  He then told Potter he might run, and he should not be 
interrupted till he reached a certain distance.  Potter started at 
the word of command, and before a gun was fired he had reached the 
lake.  His first impulse was to jump in the water and dive for it, 
which he did.  Rose was close behind him, and formed his men on the 
bank ready to shoot him as he rose.  In a few seconds he came up to 
breathe; and scarce had his head reached the surface of the water 
when it was completely riddled with the shot of their guns, and he 
sunk, to rise no more!'


'MURDER IN ARKANSAS.


'We understand THAT A SEVERE RENCONTRE CAME OFF a few days since in 
the Seneca Nation, between Mr. Loose, the sub-agent of the mixed 
band of the Senecas, Quapaw, and Shawnees, and Mr. James Gillespie, 
of the mercantile firm of Thomas G. Allison and Co., of Maysville, 
Benton, County Ark, in which the latter was slain with a bowie-
knife.  Some difficulty had for some time existed between the 
parties.  It is said that Major Gillespie brought on the attack 
with a cane.  A severe conflict ensued, during which two pistols 
were fired by Gillespie and one by Loose.  Loose then stabbed 
Gillespie with one of those never-failing weapons, a bowie-knife.  
The death of Major G. is much regretted, as he was a liberal-minded 
and energetic man.  Since the above was in type, we have learned 
that Major Allison has stated to some of our citizens in town that 
Mr. Loose gave the first blow.  We forbear to give any particulars, 
as THE MATTER WILL BE THE SUBJECT OF JUDICIAL INVESTIGATION.'


'FOUL DEED.


The steamer Thames, just from Missouri river, brought us a 
handbill, offering a reward of 500 dollars, for the person who 
assassinated Lilburn W. Baggs, late Governor of this State, at 
Independence, on the night of the 6th inst.  Governor Baggs, it is 
stated in a written memorandum, was not dead, but mortally wounded.

'Since the above was written, we received a note from the clerk of 
the Thames, giving the following particulars.  Gov. Baggs was shot 
by some villain on Friday, 6th inst., in the evening, while sitting 
in a room in his own house in Independence.  His son, a boy, 
hearing a report, ran into the room, and found the Governor sitting 
in his chair, with his jaw fallen down, and his head leaning back; 
on discovering the injury done to his father, he gave the alarm.  
Foot tracks were found in the garden below the window, and a pistol 
picked up supposed to have been overloaded, and thrown from the 
hand of the scoundrel who fired it.  Three buck shots of a heavy 
load, took effect; one going through his mouth, one into the brain, 
and another probably in or near the brain; all going into the back 
part of the neck and head.  The Governor was still alive on the 
morning of the 7th; but no hopes for his recovery by his friends, 
and but slight hopes from his physicians.

'A man was suspected, and the Sheriff most probably has possession 
of him by this time.

'The pistol was one of a pair stolen some days previous from a 
baker in Independence, and the legal authorities have the 
description of the other.'


'RENCONTRE.


'An unfortunate AFFAIR took place on Friday evening in Chatres 
Street, in which one of our most respectable citizens received a 
dangerous wound, from a poignard, in the abdomen.  From the Bee 
(New Orleans) of yesterday, we learn the following particulars.  It 
appears that an article was published in the French side of the 
paper on Monday last, containing some strictures on the Artillery 
Battalion for firing their guns on Sunday morning, in answer to 
those from the Ontario and Woodbury, and thereby much alarm was 
caused to the families of those persons who were out all night 
preserving the peace of the city.  Major C. Gally, Commander of the 
battalion, resenting this, called at the office and demanded the 
author's name; that of Mr. P. Arpin was given to him, who was 
absent at the time.  Some angry words then passed with one of the 
proprietors, and a challenge followed; the friends of both parties 
tried to arrange the affair, but failed to do so.  On Friday 
evening, about seven o'clock, Major Gally met Mr. P. Arpin in 
Chatres Street, and accosted him.  "Are you Mr. Arpin?"

'"Yes, sir."

'"Then I have to tell you that you are a - " (applying an 
appropriate epithet).

'"I shall remind you of your words, sir."

'"But I have said I would break my cane on your shoulders."

'"I know it, but I have not yet received the blow."

'At these words, Major Gally, having a cane in his hands, struck 
Mr. Arpin across the face, and the latter drew a poignard from his 
pocket and stabbed Major Gally in the abdomen.

'Fears are entertained that the wound will be mortal.  WE 
UNDERSTAND THAT MR. ARPIN HAS GIVEN SECURITY FOR HIS APPEARANCE AT 
THE CRIMINAL COURT TO ANSWER THE CHARGE.'


'AFFRAY IN MISSISSIPPI.


'On the 27th ult., in an affray near Carthage, Leake county, 
Mississippi, between James Cottingham and John Wilburn, the latter 
was shot by the former, and so horribly wounded, that there was no 
hope of his recovery.  On the 2nd instant, there was an affray at 
Carthage between A. C. Sharkey and George Goff, in which the latter 
was shot, and thought mortally wounded.  Sharkey delivered himself 
up to the authorities, BUT CHANGED HIS MIND AND ESCAPED!'


'PERSONAL ENCOUNTER.


'An encounter took place in Sparta, a few days since, between the 
barkeeper of an hotel, and a man named Bury.  It appears that Bury 
had become somewhat noisy, AND THAT THE BARKEEPER, DETERMINED TO 
PRESERVE ORDER, HAD THREATENED TO SHOOT BURY, whereupon Bury drew a 
pistol and shot the barkeeper down.  He was not dead at the last 
accounts, but slight hopes were entertained of his recovery.'


'DUEL.


'The clerk of the steamboat TRIBUNE informs us that another duel 
was fought on Tuesday last, by Mr. Robbins, a bank officer in 
Vicksburg, and Mr. Fall, the editor of the Vicksburg Sentinel.  
According to the arrangement, the parties had six pistols each, 
which, after the word "Fire!" THEY WERE TO DISCHARGE AS FAST AS 
THEY PLEASED.  Fall fired two pistols without effect.  Mr. Robbins' 
first shot took effect in Fall's thigh, who fell, and was unable to 
continue the combat.'


'AFFRAY IN CLARKE COUNTY.


'An UNFORTUNATE AFFRAY occurred in Clarke county (MO.), near 
Waterloo, on Tuesday the 19th ult., which originated in settling 
the partnership concerns of Messrs. M'Kane and M'Allister, who had 
been engaged in the business of distilling, and resulted in the 
death of the latter, who was shot down by Mr. M'Kane, because of 
his attempting to take possession of seven barrels of whiskey, the 
property of M'Kane, which had been knocked off to M'Allister at a 
sheriff's sale at one dollar per barrel.  M'Kane immediately fled 
AND AT THE LATEST DATES HAD NOT BEEN TAKEN.

'THIS UNFORTUNATE AFFRAY caused considerable excitement in the 
neighbourhood, as both the parties were men with large families 
depending upon them and stood well in the community.'


I will quote but one more paragraph, which, by reason of its 
monstrous absurdity, may be a relief to these atrocious deeds.


'AFFAIR OF HONOUR.


'We have just heard the particulars of a meeting which took place 
on Six Mile Island, on Tuesday, between two young bloods of our 
city:  Samuel Thurston, AGED FIFTEEN, and William Hine, AGED 
THIRTEEN years.  They were attended by young gentlemen of the same 
age.  The weapons used on the occasion, were a couple of Dickson's 
best rifles; the distance, thirty yards.  They took one fire, 
without any damage being sustained by either party, except the ball 
of Thurston's gun passing through the crown of Hine's hat.  THROUGH 
THE INTERCESSION OF THE BOARD OF HONOUR, the challenge was 
withdrawn, and the difference amicably adjusted.'

If the reader will picture to himself the kind of Board of Honour 
which amicably adjusted the difference between these two little 
boys, who in any other part of the world would have been amicably 
adjusted on two porters' backs and soundly flogged with birchen 
rods, he will be possessed, no doubt, with as strong a sense of its 
ludicrous character, as that which sets me laughing whenever its 
image rises up before me.

Now, I appeal to every human mind, imbued with the commonest of 
common sense, and the commonest of common humanity; to all 
dispassionate, reasoning creatures, of any shade of opinion; and 
ask, with these revolting evidences of the state of society which 
exists in and about the slave districts of America before them, can 
they have a doubt of the real condition of the slave, or can they 
for a moment make a compromise between the institution or any of 
its flagrant, fearful features, and their own just consciences?  
Will they say of any tale of cruelty and horror, however aggravated 
in degree, that it is improbable, when they can turn to the public 
prints, and, running, read such signs as these, laid before them by 
the men who rule the slaves:  in their own acts and under their own 
hands?

Do we not know that the worst deformity and ugliness of slavery are 
at once the cause and the effect of the reckless license taken by 
these freeborn outlaws?  Do we not know that the man who has been 
born and bred among its wrongs; who has seen in his childhood 
husbands obliged at the word of command to flog their wives; women, 
indecently compelled to hold up their own garments that men might 
lay the heavier stripes upon their legs, driven and harried by 
brutal overseers in their time of travail, and becoming mothers on 
the field of toil, under the very lash itself; who has read in 
youth, and seen his virgin sisters read, descriptions of runaway 
men and women, and their disfigured persons, which could not be 
published elsewhere, of so much stock upon a farm, or at a show of 
beasts:- do we not know that that man, whenever his wrath is 
kindled up, will be a brutal savage?  Do we not know that as he is 
a coward in his domestic life, stalking among his shrinking men and 
women slaves armed with his heavy whip, so he will be a coward out 
of doors, and carrying cowards' weapons hidden in his breast, will 
shoot men down and stab them when he quarrels?  And if our reason 
did not teach us this and much beyond; if we were such idiots as to 
close our eyes to that fine mode of training which rears up such 
men; should we not know that they who among their equals stab and 
pistol in the legislative halls, and in the counting-house, and on 
the marketplace, and in all the elsewhere peaceful pursuits of 
life, must be to their dependants, even though they were free 
servants, so many merciless and unrelenting tyrants?

What! shall we declaim against the ignorant peasantry of Ireland, 
and mince the matter when these American taskmasters are in 
question?  Shall we cry shame on the brutality of those who 
hamstring cattle:  and spare the lights of Freedom upon earth who 
notch the ears of men and women, cut pleasant posies in the 
shrinking flesh, learn to write with pens of red-hot iron on the 
human face, rack their poetic fancies for liveries of mutilation 
which their slaves shall wear for life and carry to the grave, 
breaking living limbs as did the soldiery who mocked and slew the 
Saviour of the world, and set defenceless creatures up for targets!  
Shall we whimper over legends of the tortures practised on each 
other by the Pagan Indians, and smile upon the cruelties of 
Christian men!  Shall we, so long as these things last, exult above 
the scattered remnants of that race, and triumph in the white 
enjoyment of their possessions?  Rather, for me, restore the forest 
and the Indian village; in lieu of stars and stripes, let some poor 
feather flutter in the breeze; replace the streets and squares by 
wigwams; and though the death-song of a hundred haughty warriors 
fill the air, it will be music to the shriek of one unhappy slave.

On one theme, which is commonly before our eyes, and in respect of 
which our national character is changing fast, let the plain Truth 
be spoken, and let us not, like dastards, beat about the bush by 
hinting at the Spaniard and the fierce Italian.  When knives are 
drawn by Englishmen in conflict let it be said and known:  'We owe 
this change to Republican Slavery.  These are the weapons of 
Freedom.  With sharp points and edges such as these, Liberty in 
America hews and hacks her slaves; or, failing that pursuit, her 
sons devote them to a better use, and turn them on each other.'



CHAPTER XVIII - CONCLUDING REMARKS



THERE are many passages in this book, where I have been at some 
pains to resist the temptation of troubling my readers with my own 
deductions and conclusions:  preferring that they should judge for 
themselves, from such premises as I have laid before them.  My only 
object in the outset, was, to carry them with me faithfully 
wheresoever I went:  and that task I have discharged.

But I may be pardoned, if on such a theme as the general character 
of the American people, and the general character of their social 
system, as presented to a stranger's eyes, I desire to express my 
own opinions in a few words, before I bring these volumes to a 
close.

They are, by nature, frank, brave, cordial, hospitable, and 
affectionate.  Cultivation and refinement seem but to enhance their 
warmth of heart and ardent enthusiasm; and it is the possession of 
these latter qualities in a most remarkable degree, which renders 
an educated American one of the most endearing and most generous of 
friends.  I never was so won upon, as by this class; never yielded 
up my full confidence and esteem so readily and pleasurably, as to 
them; never can make again, in half a year, so many friends for 
whom I seem to entertain the regard of half a life.

These qualities are natural, I implicitly believe, to the whole 
people.  That they are, however, sadly sapped and blighted in their 
growth among the mass; and that there are influences at work which 
endanger them still more, and give but little present promise of 
their healthy restoration; is a truth that ought to be told.

It is an essential part of every national character to pique itself 
mightily upon its faults, and to deduce tokens of its virtue or its 
wisdom from their very exaggeration.  One great blemish in the 
popular mind of America, and the prolific parent of an innumerable 
brood of evils, is Universal Distrust.  Yet the American citizen 
plumes himself upon this spirit, even when he is sufficiently 
dispassionate to perceive the ruin it works; and will often adduce 
it, in spite of his own reason, as an instance of the great 
sagacity and acuteness of the people, and their superior shrewdness 
and independence.

'You carry,' says the stranger, 'this jealousy and distrust into 
every transaction of public life.  By repelling worthy men from 
your legislative assemblies, it has bred up a class of candidates 
for the suffrage, who, in their very act, disgrace your 
Institutions and your people's choice.  It has rendered you so 
fickle, and so given to change, that your inconstancy has passed 
into a proverb; for you no sooner set up an idol firmly, than you 
are sure to pull it down and dash it into fragments:  and this, 
because directly you reward a benefactor, or a public servant, you 
distrust him, merely because he is rewarded; and immediately apply 
yourselves to find out, either that you have been too bountiful in 
your acknowledgments, or he remiss in his deserts.  Any man who 
attains a high place among you, from the President downwards, may 
date his downfall from that moment; for any printed lie that any 
notorious villain pens, although it militate directly against the 
character and conduct of a life, appeals at once to your distrust, 
and is believed.  You will strain at a gnat in the way of 
trustfulness and confidence, however fairly won and well deserved; 
but you will swallow a whole caravan of camels, if they be laden 
with unworthy doubts and mean suspicions.  Is this well, think you, 
or likely to elevate the character of the governors or the 
governed, among you?'

The answer is invariably the same:  'There's freedom of opinion 
here, you know.  Every man thinks for himself, and we are not to be 
easily overreached.  That's how our people come to be suspicious.'

Another prominent feature is the love of 'smart' dealing:  which 
gilds over many a swindle and gross breach of trust; many a 
defalcation, public and private; and enables many a knave to hold 
his head up with the best, who well deserves a halter; though it 
has not been without its retributive operation, for this smartness 
has done more in a few years to impair the public credit, and to 
cripple the public resources, than dull honesty, however rash, 
could have effected in a century.  The merits of a broken 
speculation, or a bankruptcy, or of a successful scoundrel, are not 
gauged by its or his observance of the golden rule, 'Do as you 
would be done by,' but are considered with reference to their 
smartness.  I recollect, on both occasions of our passing that ill-
fated Cairo on the Mississippi, remarking on the bad effects such 
gross deceits must have when they exploded, in generating a want of 
confidence abroad, and discouraging foreign investment:  but I was 
given to understand that this was a very smart scheme by which a 
deal of money had been made:  and that its smartest feature was, 
that they forgot these things abroad, in a very short time, and 
speculated again, as freely as ever.  The following dialogue I have 
held a hundred times:  'Is it not a very disgraceful circumstance 
that such a man as So-and-so should be acquiring a large property 
by the most infamous and odious means, and notwithstanding all the 
crimes of which he has been guilty, should be tolerated and abetted 
by your Citizens?  He is a public nuisance, is he not?'  'Yes, 
sir.'  'A convicted liar?'  'Yes, sir.'  'He has been kicked, and 
cuffed, and caned?'  'Yes, sir.'  'And he is utterly dishonourable, 
debased, and profligate?'  'Yes, sir.'  'In the name of wonder, 
then, what is his merit?'  'Well, sir, he is a smart man.'

In like manner, all kinds of deficient and impolitic usages are 
referred to the national love of trade; though, oddly enough, it 
would be a weighty charge against a foreigner that he regarded the 
Americans as a trading people.  The love of trade is assigned as a 
reason for that comfortless custom, so very prevalent in country 
towns, of married persons living in hotels, having no fireside of 
their own, and seldom meeting from early morning until late at 
night, but at the hasty public meals.  The love of trade is a 
reason why the literature of America is to remain for ever 
unprotected 'For we are a trading people, and don't care for 
poetry:' though we DO, by the way, profess to be very proud of our 
poets:  while healthful amusements, cheerful means of recreation, 
and wholesome fancies, must fade before the stern utilitarian joys 
of trade.

These three characteristics are strongly presented at every turn, 
full in the stranger's view.  But, the foul growth of America has a 
more tangled root than this; and it strikes its fibres, deep in its 
licentious Press.

Schools may be erected, East, West, North, and South; pupils be 
taught, and masters reared, by scores upon scores of thousands; 
colleges may thrive, churches may be crammed, temperance may be 
diffused, and advancing knowledge in all other forms walk through 
the land with giant strides:  but while the newspaper press of 
America is in, or near, its present abject state, high moral 
improvement in that country is hopeless.  Year by year, it must and 
will go back; year by year, the tone of public feeling must sink 
lower down; year by year, the Congress and the Senate must become 
of less account before all decent men; and year by year, the memory 
of the Great Fathers of the Revolution must be outraged more and 
more, in the bad life of their degenerate child.

Among the herd of journals which are published in the States, there 
are some, the reader scarcely need be told, of character and 
credit.  From personal intercourse with accomplished gentlemen 
connected with publications of this class, I have derived both 
pleasure and profit.  But the name of these is Few, and of the 
others Legion; and the influence of the good, is powerless to 
counteract the moral poison of the bad.

Among the gentry of America; among the well-informed and moderate:  
in the learned professions; at the bar and on the bench:  there is, 
as there can be, but one opinion, in reference to the vicious 
character of these infamous journals.  It is sometimes contended - 
I will not say strangely, for it is natural to seek excuses for 
such a disgrace - that their influence is not so great as a visitor 
would suppose.  I must be pardoned for saying that there is no 
warrant for this plea, and that every fact and circumstance tends 
directly to the opposite conclusion.

When any man, of any grade of desert in intellect or character, can 
climb to any public distinction, no matter what, in America, 
without first grovelling down upon the earth, and bending the knee 
before this monster of depravity; when any private excellence is 
safe from its attacks; when any social confidence is left unbroken 
by it, or any tie of social decency and honour is held in the least 
regard; when any man in that free country has freedom of opinion, 
and presumes to think for himself, and speak for himself, without 
humble reference to a censorship which, for its rampant ignorance 
and base dishonesty, he utterly loathes and despises in his heart; 
when those who most acutely feel its infamy and the reproach it 
casts upon the nation, and who most denounce it to each other, dare 
to set their heels upon, and crush it openly, in the sight of all 
men:  then, I will believe that its influence is lessening, and men 
are returning to their manly senses.  But while that Press has its 
evil eye in every house, and its black hand in every appointment in 
the state, from a president to a postman; while, with ribald 
slander for its only stock in trade, it is the standard literature 
of an enormous class, who must find their reading in a newspaper, 
or they will not read at all; so long must its odium be upon the 
country's head, and so long must the evil it works, be plainly 
visible in the Republic.

To those who are accustomed to the leading English journals, or to 
the respectable journals of the Continent of Europe; to those who 
are accustomed to anything else in print and paper; it would be 
impossible, without an amount of extract for which I have neither 
space nor inclination, to convey an adequate idea of this frightful 
engine in America.  But if any man desire confirmation of my 
statement on this head, let him repair to any place in this city of 
London, where scattered numbers of these publications are to be 
found; and there, let him form his own opinion. (1)

It would be well, there can be no doubt, for the American people as 
a whole, if they loved the Real less, and the Ideal somewhat more.  
It would be well, if there were greater encouragement to lightness 
of heart and gaiety, and a wider cultivation of what is beautiful, 
without being eminently and directly useful.  But here, I think the 
general remonstrance, 'we are a new country,' which is so often 
advanced as an excuse for defects which are quite unjustifiable, as 
being, of right, only the slow growth of an old one, may be very 
reasonably urged:  and I yet hope to hear of there being some other 
national amusement in the United States, besides newspaper 
politics.

They certainly are not a humorous people, and their temperament 
always impressed me is being of a dull and gloomy character.  In 
shrewdness of remark, and a certain cast-iron quaintness, the 
Yankees, or people of New England, unquestionably take the lead; as 
they do in most other evidences of intelligence.  But in travelling 
about, out of the large cities - as I have remarked in former parts 
of these volumes - I was quite oppressed by the prevailing 
seriousness and melancholy air of business:  which was so general 
and unvarying, that at every new town I came to, I seemed to meet 
the very same people whom I had left behind me, at the last.  Such 
defects as are perceptible in the national manners, seem, to me, to 
be referable, in a great degree, to this cause:  which has 
generated a dull, sullen persistence in coarse usages, and rejected 
the graces of life as undeserving of attention.  There is no doubt 
that Washington, who was always most scrupulous and exact on points 
of ceremony, perceived the tendency towards this mistake, even in 
his time, and did his utmost to correct it.

I cannot hold with other writers on these subjects that the 
prevalence of various forms of dissent in America, is in any way 
attributable to the non-existence there of an established church:  
indeed, I think the temper of the people, if it admitted of such an 
Institution being founded amongst them, would lead them to desert 
it, as a matter of course, merely because it WAS established.  But, 
supposing it to exist, I doubt its probable efficacy in summoning 
the wandering sheep to one great fold, simply because of the 
immense amount of dissent which prevails at home; and because I do 
not find in America any one form of religion with which we in 
Europe, or even in England, are unacquainted.  Dissenters resort 
thither in great numbers, as other people do, simply because it is 
a land of resort; and great settlements of them are founded, 
because ground can be purchased, and towns and villages reared, 
where there were none of the human creation before.  But even the 
Shakers emigrated from England; our country is not unknown to Mr. 
Joseph Smith, the apostle of Mormonism, or to his benighted 
disciples; I have beheld religious scenes myself in some of our 
populous towns which can hardly be surpassed by an American camp-
meeting; and I am not aware that any instance of superstitious 
imposture on the one hand, and superstitious credulity on the 
other, has had its origin in the United States, which we cannot 
more than parallel by the precedents of Mrs. Southcote, Mary Tofts 
the rabbit-breeder, or even Mr. Thorn of Canterbury:  which latter 
case arose, some time after the dark ages had passed away.

The Republican Institutions of America undoubtedly lead the people 
to assert their self-respect and their equality; but a traveller is 
bound to bear those Institutions in his mind, and not hastily to 
resent the near approach of a class of strangers, who, at home, 
would keep aloof.  This characteristic, when it was tinctured with 
no foolish pride, and stopped short of no honest service, never 
offended me; and I very seldom, if ever, experienced its rude or 
unbecoming display.  Once or twice it was comically developed, as 
in the following case; but this was an amusing incident, and not 
the rule, or near it.

I wanted a pair of boots at a certain town, for I had none to 
travel in, but those with the memorable cork soles, which were much 
too hot for the fiery decks of a steamboat.  I therefore sent a 
message to an artist in boots, importing, with my compliments, that 
I should be happy to see him, if he would do me the polite favour 
to call.  He very kindly returned for answer, that he would 'look 
round' at six o'clock that evening.

I was lying on the sofa, with a book and a wine-glass, at about 
that time, when the door opened, and a gentleman in a stiff cravat, 
within a year or two on either side of thirty, entered, in his hat 
and gloves; walked up to the looking-glass; arranged his hair; took 
off his gloves; slowly produced a measure from the uttermost depths 
of his coat-pocket; and requested me, in a languid tone, to 'unfix' 
my straps.  I complied, but looked with some curiosity at his hat, 
which was still upon his head.  It might have been that, or it 
might have been the heat - but he took it off.  Then, he sat 
himself down on a chair opposite to me; rested an arm on each knee; 
and, leaning forward very much, took from the ground, by a great 
effort, the specimen of metropolitan workmanship which I had just 
pulled off:  whistling, pleasantly, as he did so.  He turned it 
over and over; surveyed it with a contempt no language can express; 
and inquired if I wished him to fix me a boot like THAT?  I 
courteously replied, that provided the boots were large enough, I 
would leave the rest to him; that if convenient and practicable, I 
should not object to their bearing some resemblance to the model 
then before him; but that I would be entirely guided by, and would 
beg to leave the whole subject to, his judgment and discretion.  
'You an't partickler, about this scoop in the heel, I suppose 
then?' says he:  'we don't foller that, here.'  I repeated my last 
observation.  He looked at himself in the glass again; went closer 
to it to dash a grain or two of dust out of the corner of his eye; 
and settled his cravat.  All this time, my leg and foot were in the 
air.  'Nearly ready, sir?' I inquired.  'Well, pretty nigh,' he 
said; 'keep steady.'  I kept as steady as I could, both in foot and 
face; and having by this time got the dust out, and found his 
pencil-case, he measured me, and made the necessary notes.  When he 
had finished, he fell into his old attitude, and taking up the boot 
again, mused for some time.  'And this,' he said, at last, 'is an 
English boot, is it?  This is a London boot, eh?'  'That, sir,' I 
replied, 'is a London boot.'  He mused over it again, after the 
manner of Hamlet with Yorick's skull; nodded his head, as who 
should say, 'I pity the Institutions that led to the production of 
this boot!'; rose; put up his pencil, notes, and paper - glancing 
at himself in the glass, all the time - put on his hat - drew on 
his gloves very slowly; and finally walked out.  When he had been 
gone about a minute, the door reopened, and his hat and his head 
reappeared.  He looked round the room, and at the boot again, which 
was still lying on the floor; appeared thoughtful for a minute; and 
then said 'Well, good arternoon.'  'Good afternoon, sir,' said I:  
and that was the end of the interview.

There is but one other head on which I wish to offer a remark; and 
that has reference to the public health.  In so vast a country, 
where there are thousands of millions of acres of land yet 
unsettled and uncleared, and on every rood of which, vegetable 
decomposition is annually taking place; where there are so many 
great rivers, and such opposite varieties of climate; there cannot 
fail to be a great amount of sickness at certain seasons.  But I 
may venture to say, after conversing with many members of the 
medical profession in America, that I am not singular in the 
opinion that much of the disease which does prevail, might be 
avoided, if a few common precautions were observed.  Greater means 
of personal cleanliness, are indispensable to this end; the custom 
of hastily swallowing large quantities of animal food, three times 
a-day, and rushing back to sedentary pursuits after each meal, must 
be changed; the gentler sex must go more wisely clad, and take more 
healthful exercise; and in the latter clause, the males must be 
included also.  Above all, in public institutions, and throughout 
the whole of every town and city, the system of ventilation, and 
drainage, and removal of impurities requires to be thoroughly 
revised.  There is no local Legislature in America which may not 
study Mr. Chadwick's excellent Report upon the Sanitary Condition 
of our Labouring Classes, with immense advantage.

* * * * * *

I HAVE now arrived at the close of this book.  I have little reason 
to believe, from certain warnings I have had since I returned to 
England, that it will be tenderly or favourably received by the 
American people; and as I have written the Truth in relation to the 
mass of those who form their judgments and express their opinions, 
it will be seen that I have no desire to court, by any adventitious 
means, the popular applause.

It is enough for me, to know, that what I have set down in these 
pages, cannot cost me a single friend on the other side of the 
Atlantic, who is, in anything, deserving of the name.  For the 
rest, I put my trust, implicitly, in the spirit in which they have 
been conceived and penned; and I can bide my time.

I have made no reference to my reception, nor have I suffered it to 
influence me in what I have written; for, in either case, I should 
have offered but a sorry acknowledgment, compared with that I bear 
within my breast, towards those partial readers of my former books, 
across the Water, who met me with an open hand, and not with one 
that closed upon an iron muzzle.


THE END



POSTSCRIPT



AT a Public Dinner given to me on Saturday the 18th of April, 1868, 
in the City of New York, by two hundred representatives of the 
Press of the United States of America, I made the following 
observations among others:

'So much of my voice has lately been heard in the land, that I 
might have been contented with troubling you no further from my 
present standing-point, were it not a duty with which I henceforth 
charge myself, not only here but on every suitable occasion, 
whatsoever and wheresoever, to express my high and grateful sense 
of my second reception in America, and to bear my honest testimony 
to the national generosity and magnanimity.  Also, to declare how 
astounded I have been by the amazing changes I have seen around me 
on every side, - changes moral, changes physical, changes in the 
amount of land subdued and peopled, changes in the rise of vast new 
cities, changes in the growth of older cities almost out of 
recognition, changes in the graces and amenities of life, changes 
in the Press, without whose advancement no advancement can take 
place anywhere.  Nor am I, believe me, so arrogant as to suppose 
that in five and twenty years there have been no changes in me, and 
that I had nothing to learn and no extreme impressions to correct 
when I was here first.  And this brings me to a point on which I 
have, ever since I landed in the United States last November, 
observed a strict silence, though sometimes tempted to break it, 
but in reference to which I will, with your good leave, take you 
into my confidence now.  Even the Press, being human, may be 
sometimes mistaken or misinformed, and I rather think that I have 
in one or two rare instances observed its information to be not 
strictly accurate with reference to myself.  Indeed, I have, now 
and again, been more surprised by printed news that I have read of 
myself, than by any printed news that I have ever read in my 
present state of existence.  Thus, the vigour and perseverance with 
which I have for some months past been collecting materials for, 
and hammering away at, a new book on America has much astonished 
me; seeing that all that time my declaration has been perfectly 
well known to my publishers on both sides of the Atlantic, that no 
consideration on earth would induce me to write one.  But what I 
have intended, what I have resolved upon (and this is the 
confidence I seek to place in you) is, on my return to England, in 
my own person, in my own journal, to bear, for the behoof of my 
countrymen, such testimony to the gigantic changes in this country 
as I have hinted at to-night.  Also, to record that wherever I have 
been, in the smallest places equally with the largest, I have been 
received with unsurpassable politeness, delicacy, sweet temper, 
hospitality, consideration, and with unsurpassable respect for the 
privacy daily enforced upon me by the nature of my avocation here 
and the state of my health.  This testimony, so long as I live, and 
so long as my descendants have any legal right in my books, I shall 
cause to be republished, as an appendix to every copy of those two 
books of mine in which I have referred to America.  And this I will 
do and cause to be done, not in mere love and thankfulness, but 
because I regard it as an act of plain justice and honour.'

I said these words with the greatest earnestness that I could lay 
upon them, and I repeat them in print here with equal earnestness.  
So long as this book shall last, I hope that they will form a part 
of it, and will be fairly read as inseparable from my experiences 
and impressions of America.

CHARLES DICKENS.

MAY, 1868.



Footnotes:

(1) NOTE TO THE ORIGINAL EDITION. - Or let him refer to an able, 
and perfectly truthful article, in THE FOREIGN QUARTERLY REVIEW, 
published in the present month of October; to which my attention 
has been attracted, since these sheets have been passing through 
the press.  He will find some specimens there, by no means 
remarkable to any man who has been in America, but sufficiently 
striking to one who has not.




End of the Project Gutenberg Etext of American Notes, by Charles Dickens

Project Gutenberg Etext of The Battle of Life by Charles Dickens
#10 in our series by Charles Dickens


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


The Battle of Life

by Charles Dickens

October, 1996  [Etext #676]


Project Gutenberg Etext of The Battle of Life by Charles Dickens
*****This file should be named batlf10.txt or batlf10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, batlf11.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, batlf10a.txt.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-two text
files per month:  or 400 more Etexts in 1996 for a total of 800.
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach 80 billion Etexts.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only 10% of the present number of computer users.  2001
should have at least twice as many computer users as that, so it
will require us reaching less than 5% of the users in 2001.


We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/BU":  and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law. (BU = Benedictine
University).  (Subscriptions to our paper newsletter go to BU.)

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext90 through /etext96
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET INDEX?00.GUT
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Benedictine University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association / Benedictine
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Benedictine University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*







The Battle of Life by Charles Dickens
Scanned and proofed by David Price
email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk





The Battle of Life





CHAPTER I - Part The First



Once upon a time, it matters little when, and in stalwart England, 
it matters little where, a fierce battle was fought.  It was fought 
upon a long summer day when the waving grass was green.  Many a 
wild flower formed by the Almighty Hand to be a perfumed goblet for 
the dew, felt its enamelled cup filled high with blood that day, 
and shrinking dropped.  Many an insect deriving its delicate colour 
from harmless leaves and herbs, was stained anew that day by dying 
men, and marked its frightened way with an unnatural track.  The 
painted butterfly took blood into the air upon the edges of its 
wings.  The stream ran red.  The trodden ground became a quagmire, 
whence, from sullen pools collected in the prints of human feet and 
horses' hoofs, the one prevailing hue still lowered and glimmered 
at the sun.

Heaven keep us from a knowledge of the sights the moon beheld upon 
that field, when, coming up above the black line of distant rising-
ground, softened and blurred at the edge by trees, she rose into 
the sky and looked upon the plain, strewn with upturned faces that 
had once at mothers' breasts sought mothers' eyes, or slumbered 
happily.  Heaven keep us from a knowledge of the secrets whispered 
afterwards upon the tainted wind that blew across the scene of that 
day's work and that night's death and suffering!  Many a lonely 
moon was bright upon the battle-ground, and many a star kept 
mournful watch upon it, and many a wind from every quarter of the 
earth blew over it, before the traces of the fight were worn away.

They lurked and lingered for a long time, but survived in little 
things; for, Nature, far above the evil passions of men, soon 
recovered Her serenity, and smiled upon the guilty battle-ground as 
she had done before, when it was innocent.  The larks sang high 
above it; the swallows skimmed and dipped and flitted to and fro; 
the shadows of the flying clouds pursued each other swiftly, over 
grass and corn and turnip-field and wood, and over roof and church-
spire in the nestling town among the trees, away into the bright 
distance on the borders of the sky and earth, where the red sunsets 
faded.  Crops were sown, and grew up, and were gathered in; the 
stream that had been crimsoned, turned a watermill; men whistled at 
the plough; gleaners and haymakers were seen in quiet groups at 
work; sheep and oxen pastured; boys whooped and called, in fields, 
to scare away the birds; smoke rose from cottage chimneys; sabbath 
bells rang peacefully; old people lived and died; the timid 
creatures of the field, the simple flowers of the bush and garden, 
grew and withered in their destined terms:  and all upon the fierce 
and bloody battle-ground, where thousands upon thousands had been 
killed in the great fight.  But, there were deep green patches in 
the growing corn at first, that people looked at awfully.  Year 
after year they re-appeared; and it was known that underneath those 
fertile spots, heaps of men and horses lay buried, 
indiscriminately, enriching the ground.  The husbandmen who 
ploughed those places, shrunk from the great worms abounding there; 
and the sheaves they yielded, were, for many a long year, called 
the Battle Sheaves, and set apart; and no one ever knew a Battle 
Sheaf to be among the last load at a Harvest Home.  For a long 
time, every furrow that was turned, revealed some fragments of the 
fight.  For a long time, there were wounded trees upon the battle-
ground; and scraps of hacked and broken fence and wall, where 
deadly struggles had been made; and trampled parts where not a leaf 
or blade would grow.  For a long time, no village girl would dress 
her hair or bosom with the sweetest flower from that field of 
death:  and after many a year had come and gone, the berries 
growing there, were still believed to leave too deep a stain upon 
the hand that plucked them.

The Seasons in their course, however, though they passed as lightly 
as the summer clouds themselves, obliterated, in the lapse of time, 
even these remains of the old conflict; and wore away such 
legendary traces of it as the neighbouring people carried in their 
minds, until they dwindled into old wives' tales, dimly remembered 
round the winter fire, and waning every year.  Where the wild 
flowers and berries had so long remained upon the stem untouched, 
gardens arose, and houses were built, and children played at 
battles on the turf.  The wounded trees had long ago made Christmas 
logs, and blazed and roared away.  The deep green patches were no 
greener now than the memory of those who lay in dust below.  The 
ploughshare still turned up from time to time some rusty bits of 
metal, but it was hard to say what use they had ever served, and 
those who found them wondered and disputed.  An old dinted 
corselet, and a helmet, had been hanging in the church so long, 
that the same weak half-blind old man who tried in vain to make 
them out above the whitewashed arch, had marvelled at them as a 
baby.  If the host slain upon the field, could have been for a 
moment reanimated in the forms in which they fell, each upon the 
spot that was the bed of his untimely death, gashed and ghastly 
soldiers would have stared in, hundreds deep, at household door and 
window; and would have risen on the hearths of quiet homes; and 
would have been the garnered store of barns and granaries; and 
would have started up between the cradled infant and its nurse; and 
would have floated with the stream, and whirled round on the mill, 
and crowded the orchard, and burdened the meadow, and piled the 
rickyard high with dying men.  So altered was the battle-ground, 
where thousands upon thousands had been killed in the great fight.

Nowhere more altered, perhaps, about a hundred years ago, than in 
one little orchard attached to an old stone house with a 
honeysuckle porch; where, on a bright autumn morning, there were 
sounds of music and laughter, and where two girls danced merrily 
together on the grass, while some half-dozen peasant women standing 
on ladders, gathering the apples from the trees, stopped in their 
work to look down, and share their enjoyment.  It was a pleasant, 
lively, natural scene; a beautiful day, a retired spot; and the two 
girls, quite unconstrained and careless, danced in the freedom and 
gaiety of their hearts.

If there were no such thing as display in the world, my private 
opinion is, and I hope you agree with me, that we might get on a 
great deal better than we do, and might be infinitely more 
agreeable company than we are.  It was charming to see how these 
girls danced.  They had no spectators but the apple-pickers on the 
ladders.  They were very glad to please them, but they danced to 
please themselves (or at least you would have supposed so); and you 
could no more help admiring, than they could help dancing.  How 
they did dance!

Not like opera-dancers.  Not at all.  And not like Madame Anybody's 
finished pupils.  Not the least.  It was not quadrille dancing, nor 
minuet dancing, nor even country-dance dancing.  It was neither in 
the old style, nor the new style, nor the French style, nor the 
English style:  though it may have been, by accident, a trifle in 
the Spanish style, which is a free and joyous one, I am told, 
deriving a delightful air of off-hand inspiration, from the 
chirping little castanets.  As they danced among the orchard trees, 
and down the groves of stems and back again, and twirled each other 
lightly round and round, the influence of their airy motion seemed 
to spread and spread, in the sun-lighted scene, like an expanding 
circle in the water.  Their streaming hair and fluttering skirts, 
the elastic grass beneath their feet, the boughs that rustled in 
the morning air - the flashing leaves, the speckled shadows on the 
soft green ground - the balmy wind that swept along the landscape, 
glad to turn the distant windmill, cheerily - everything between 
the two girls, and the man and team at plough upon the ridge of 
land, where they showed against the sky as if they were the last 
things in the world - seemed dancing too.

At last, the younger of the dancing sisters, out of breath, and 
laughing gaily, threw herself upon a bench to rest.  The other 
leaned against a tree hard by.  The music, a wandering harp and 
fiddle, left off with a flourish, as if it boasted of its 
freshness; though the truth is, it had gone at such a pace, and 
worked itself to such a pitch of competition with the dancing, that 
it never could have held on, half a minute longer.  The apple-
pickers on the ladders raised a hum and murmur of applause, and 
then, in keeping with the sound, bestirred themselves to work again 
like bees.

The more actively, perhaps, because an elderly gentleman, who was 
no other than Doctor Jeddler himself - it was Doctor Jeddler's 
house and orchard, you should know, and these were Doctor Jeddler's 
daughters - came bustling out to see what was the matter, and who 
the deuce played music on his property, before breakfast.  For he 
was a great philosopher, Doctor Jeddler, and not very musical.

'Music and dancing TO-DAY!' said the Doctor, stopping short, and 
speaking to himself.  'I thought they dreaded to-day.  But it's a 
world of contradictions.  Why, Grace, why, Marion!' he added, 
aloud, 'is the world more mad than usual this morning?'

'Make some allowance for it, father, if it be,' replied his younger 
daughter, Marion, going close to him, and looking into his face, 
'for it's somebody's birth-day.'

'Somebody's birth-day, Puss!' replied the Doctor.  'Don't you know 
it's always somebody's birth-day?  Did you never hear how many new 
performers enter on this - ha! ha! ha! - it's impossible to speak 
gravely of it - on this preposterous and ridiculous business called 
Life, every minute?'

'No, father!'

'No, not you, of course; you're a woman - almost,' said the Doctor.  
'By-the-by,' and he looked into the pretty face, still close to 
his, 'I suppose it's YOUR birth-day.'

'No!  Do you really, father?' cried his pet daughter, pursing up 
her red lips to be kissed.

'There!  Take my love with it,' said the Doctor, imprinting his 
upon them; 'and many happy returns of the - the idea! - of the day.  
The notion of wishing happy returns in such a farce as this,' said 
the Doctor to himself, 'is good!  Ha! ha! ha!'

Doctor Jeddler was, as I have said, a great philosopher, and the 
heart and mystery of his philosophy was, to look upon the world as 
a gigantic practical joke; as something too absurd to be considered 
seriously, by any rational man.  His system of belief had been, in 
the beginning, part and parcel of the battle-ground on which he 
lived, as you shall presently understand.

'Well!  But how did you get the music?' asked the Doctor.  
'Poultry-stealers, of course!  Where did the minstrels come from?'

'Alfred sent the music,' said his daughter Grace, adjusting a few 
simple flowers in her sister's hair, with which, in her admiration 
of that youthful beauty, she had herself adorned it half-an-hour 
before, and which the dancing had disarranged.

'Oh!  Alfred sent the music, did he?' returned the Doctor.

'Yes.  He met it coming out of the town as he was entering early.  
The men are travelling on foot, and rested there last night; and as 
it was Marion's birth-day, and he thought it would please her, he 
sent them on, with a pencilled note to me, saying that if I thought 
so too, they had come to serenade her.'

'Ay, ay,' said the Doctor, carelessly, 'he always takes your 
opinion.'

'And my opinion being favourable,' said Grace, good-humouredly; and 
pausing for a moment to admire the pretty head she decorated, with 
her own thrown back; 'and Marion being in high spirits, and 
beginning to dance, I joined her.  And so we danced to Alfred's 
music till we were out of breath.  And we thought the music all the 
gayer for being sent by Alfred.  Didn't we, dear Marion?'

'Oh, I don't know, Grace.  How you tease me about Alfred.'

'Tease you by mentioning your lover?' said her sister.

'I am sure I don't much care to have him mentioned,' said the 
wilful beauty, stripping the petals from some flowers she held, and 
scattering them on the ground.  'I am almost tired of hearing of 
him; and as to his being my lover - '

'Hush!  Don't speak lightly of a true heart, which is all your own, 
Marion,' cried her sister, 'even in jest.  There is not a truer 
heart than Alfred's in the world!'

'No-no,' said Marion, raising her eyebrows with a pleasant air of 
careless consideration, 'perhaps not.  But I don't know that 
there's any great merit in that.  I - I don't want him to be so 
very true.  I never asked him.  If he expects that I -  But, dear 
Grace, why need we talk of him at all, just now!'

It was agreeable to see the graceful figures of the blooming 
sisters, twined together, lingering among the trees, conversing 
thus, with earnestness opposed to lightness, yet, with love 
responding tenderly to love.  And it was very curious indeed to see 
the younger sister's eyes suffused with tears, and something 
fervently and deeply felt, breaking through the wilfulness of what 
she said, and striving with it painfully.

The difference between them, in respect of age, could not exceed 
four years at most; but Grace, as often happens in such cases, when 
no mother watches over both (the Doctor's wife was dead), seemed, 
in her gentle care of her young sister, and in the steadiness of 
her devotion to her, older than she was; and more removed, in 
course of nature, from all competition with her, or participation, 
otherwise than through her sympathy and true affection, in her 
wayward fancies, than their ages seemed to warrant.  Great 
character of mother, that, even in this shadow and faint reflection 
of it, purifies the heart, and raises the exalted nature nearer to 
the angels!

The Doctor's reflections, as he looked after them, and heard the 
purport of their discourse, were limited at first to certain merry 
meditations on the folly of all loves and likings, and the idle 
imposition practised on themselves by young people, who believed 
for a moment, that there could be anything serious in such bubbles, 
and were always undeceived - always!

But, the home-adorning, self-denying qualities of Grace, and her 
sweet temper, so gentle and retiring, yet including so much 
constancy and bravery of spirit, seemed all expressed to him in the 
contrast between her quiet household figure and that of his younger 
and more beautiful child; and he was sorry for her sake - sorry for 
them both - that life should be such a very ridiculous business as 
it was.

The Doctor never dreamed of inquiring whether his children, or 
either of them, helped in any way to make the scheme a serious one.  
But then he was a Philosopher.

A kind and generous man by nature, he had stumbled, by chance, over 
that common Philosopher's stone (much more easily discovered than 
the object of the alchemist's researches), which sometimes trips up 
kind and generous men, and has the fatal property of turning gold 
to dross and every precious thing to poor account.

'Britain!' cried the Doctor.  'Britain!  Holloa!'

A small man, with an uncommonly sour and discontented face, emerged 
from the house, and returned to this call the unceremonious 
acknowledgment of 'Now then!'

'Where's the breakfast table?' said the Doctor.

'In the house,' returned Britain.

'Are you going to spread it out here, as you were told last night?' 
said the Doctor.  'Don't you know that there are gentlemen coming?  
That there's business to be done this morning, before the coach 
comes by?  That this is a very particular occasion?'

'I couldn't do anything, Dr. Jeddler, till the women had done 
getting in the apples, could I?' said Britain, his voice rising 
with his reasoning, so that it was very loud at last.

'Well, have they done now?' replied the Doctor, looking at his 
watch, and clapping his hands.  'Come! make haste! where's 
Clemency?'

'Here am I, Mister,' said a voice from one of the ladders, which a 
pair of clumsy feet descended briskly.  'It's all done now.  Clear 
away, gals.  Everything shall be ready for you in half a minute, 
Mister.'

With that she began to bustle about most vigorously; presenting, as 
she did so, an appearance sufficiently peculiar to justify a word 
of introduction.

She was about thirty years old, and had a sufficiently plump and 
cheerful face, though it was twisted up into an odd expression of 
tightness that made it comical.  But, the extraordinary homeliness 
of her gait and manner, would have superseded any face in the 
world.  To say that she had two left legs, and somebody else's 
arms, and that all four limbs seemed to be out of joint, and to 
start from perfectly wrong places when they were set in motion, is 
to offer the mildest outline of the reality.  To say that she was 
perfectly content and satisfied with these arrangements, and 
regarded them as being no business of hers, and that she took her 
arms and legs as they came, and allowed them to dispose of 
themselves just as it happened, is to render faint justice to her 
equanimity.  Her dress was a prodigious pair of self-willed shoes, 
that never wanted to go where her feet went; blue stockings; a 
printed gown of many colours, and the most hideous pattern 
procurable for money; and a white apron.  She always wore short 
sleeves, and always had, by some accident, grazed elbows, in which 
she took so lively an interest, that she was continually trying to 
turn them round and get impossible views of them.  In general, a 
little cap placed somewhere on her head; though it was rarely to be 
met with in the place usually occupied in other subjects, by that 
article of dress; but, from head to foot she was scrupulously 
clean, and maintained a kind of dislocated tidiness.  Indeed, her 
laudable anxiety to be tidy and compact in her own conscience as 
well as in the public eye, gave rise to one of her most startling 
evolutions, which was to grasp herself sometimes by a sort of 
wooden handle (part of her clothing, and familiarly called a busk), 
and wrestle as it were with her garments, until they fell into a 
symmetrical arrangement.

Such, in outward form and garb, was Clemency Newcome; who was 
supposed to have unconsciously originated a corruption of her own 
Christian name, from Clementina (but nobody knew, for the deaf old 
mother, a very phenomenon of age, whom she had supported almost 
from a child, was dead, and she had no other relation); who now 
busied herself in preparing the table, and who stood, at intervals, 
with her bare red arms crossed, rubbing her grazed elbows with 
opposite hands, and staring at it very composedly, until she 
suddenly remembered something else she wanted, and jogged off to 
fetch it.

'Here are them two lawyers a-coming, Mister!' said Clemency, in a 
tone of no very great good-will.

'Ah!' cried the Doctor, advancing to the gate to meet them.  'Good 
morning, good morning!  Grace, my dear!  Marion!  Here are Messrs. 
Snitchey and Craggs.  Where's Alfred!'

'He'll be back directly, father, no doubt,' said Grace.  'He had so 
much to do this morning in his preparations for departure, that he 
was up and out by daybreak.  Good morning, gentlemen.'

'Ladies!' said Mr. Snitchey, 'for Self and Craggs,' who bowed, 
'good morning!  Miss,' to Marion, 'I kiss your hand.'  Which he 
did.  'And I wish you' - which he might or might not, for he didn't 
look, at first sight, like a gentleman troubled with many warm 
outpourings of soul, in behalf of other people, 'a hundred happy 
returns of this auspicious day.'

'Ha ha ha!' laughed the Doctor thoughtfully, with his hands in his 
pockets.  'The great farce in a hundred acts!'

'You wouldn't, I am sure,' said Mr. Snitchey, standing a small 
professional blue bag against one leg of the table, 'cut the great 
farce short for this actress, at all events, Doctor Jeddler.'

'No,' returned the Doctor.  'God forbid!  May she live to laugh at 
it, as long as she CAN laugh, and then say, with the French wit, 
"The farce is ended; draw the curtain."'

'The French wit,' said Mr. Snitchey, peeping sharply into his blue 
bag, 'was wrong, Doctor Jeddler, and your philosophy is altogether 
wrong, depend upon it, as I have often told you.  Nothing serious 
in life!  What do you call law?'

'A joke,' replied the Doctor.

'Did you ever go to law?' asked Mr. Snitchey, looking out of the 
blue bag.

'Never,' returned the Doctor.

'If you ever do,' said Mr. Snitchey, 'perhaps you'll alter that 
opinion.'

Craggs, who seemed to be represented by Snitchey, and to be 
conscious of little or no separate existence or personal 
individuality, offered a remark of his own in this place.  It 
involved the only idea of which he did not stand seized and 
possessed in equal moieties with Snitchey; but, he had some 
partners in it among the wise men of the world.

'It's made a great deal too easy,' said Mr. Craggs.

'Law is?' asked the Doctor.

'Yes,' said Mr. Craggs, 'everything is.  Everything appears to me 
to be made too easy, now-a-days.  It's the vice of these times.  If 
the world is a joke (I am not prepared to say it isn't), it ought 
to be made a very difficult joke to crack.  It ought to be as hard 
a struggle, sir, as possible.  That's the intention.  But, it's 
being made far too easy.  We are oiling the gates of life.  They 
ought to be rusty.  We shall have them beginning to turn, soon, 
with a smooth sound.  Whereas they ought to grate upon their 
hinges, sir.'

Mr. Craggs seemed positively to grate upon his own hinges, as he 
delivered this opinion; to which he communicated immense effect - 
being a cold, hard, dry, man, dressed in grey and white, like a 
flint; with small twinkles in his eyes, as if something struck 
sparks out of them.  The three natural kingdoms, indeed, had each a 
fanciful representative among this brotherhood of disputants; for 
Snitchey was like a magpie or raven (only not so sleek), and the 
Doctor had a streaked face like a winter-pippin, with here and 
there a dimple to express the peckings of the birds, and a very 
little bit of pigtail behind that stood for the stalk.

As the active figure of a handsome young man, dressed for a 
journey, and followed by a porter bearing several packages and 
baskets, entered the orchard at a brisk pace, and with an air of 
gaiety and hope that accorded well with the morning, these three 
drew together, like the brothers of the sister Fates, or like the 
Graces most effectually disguised, or like the three weird prophets 
on the heath, and greeted him.

'Happy returns, Alf!' said the Doctor, lightly.

'A hundred happy returns of this auspicious day, Mr. Heathfield!' 
said Snitchey, bowing low.

'Returns!' Craggs murmured in a deep voice, all alone.

'Why, what a battery!' exclaimed Alfred, stopping short, 'and one - 
two - three - all foreboders of no good, in the great sea before 
me.  I am glad you are not the first I have met this morning:  I 
should have taken it for a bad omen.  But, Grace was the first - 
sweet, pleasant Grace - so I defy you all!'

'If you please, Mister, I was the first you know,' said Clemency 
Newcome.  'She was walking out here, before sunrise, you remember.  
I was in the house.'

'That's true!  Clemency was the first,' said Alfred.  'So I defy 
you with Clemency.'

'Ha, ha, ha, - for Self and Craggs,' said Snitchey.  'What a 
defiance!'

'Not so bad a one as it appears, may be,' said Alfred, shaking 
hands heartily with the Doctor, and also with Snitchey and Craggs, 
and then looking round.  'Where are the - Good Heavens!'

With a start, productive for the moment of a closer partnership 
between Jonathan Snitchey and Thomas Craggs than the subsisting 
articles of agreement in that wise contemplated, he hastily betook 
himself to where the sisters stood together, and - however, I 
needn't more particularly explain his manner of saluting Marion 
first, and Grace afterwards, than by hinting that Mr. Craggs may 
possibly have considered it 'too easy.'

Perhaps to change the subject, Dr. Jeddler made a hasty move 
towards the breakfast, and they all sat down at table.  Grace 
presided; but so discreetly stationed herself, as to cut off her 
sister and Alfred from the rest of the company.  Snitchey and 
Craggs sat at opposite corners, with the blue bag between them for 
safety; the Doctor took his usual position, opposite to Grace.  
Clemency hovered galvanically about the table, as waitress; and the 
melancholy Britain, at another and a smaller board, acted as Grand 
Carver of a round of beef and a ham.

'Meat?' said Britain, approaching Mr. Snitchey, with the carving 
knife and fork in his hands, and throwing the question at him like 
a missile.

'Certainly,' returned the lawyer.

'Do YOU want any?' to Craggs.

'Lean and well done,' replied that gentleman.

Having executed these orders, and moderately supplied the Doctor 
(he seemed to know that nobody else wanted anything to eat), he 
lingered as near the Firm as he decently could, watching with an 
austere eye their disposition of the viands, and but once relaxing 
the severe expression of his face.  This was on the occasion of Mr. 
Craggs, whose teeth were not of the best, partially choking, when 
he cried out with great animation, 'I thought he was gone!'

'Now, Alfred,' said the Doctor, 'for a word or two of business, 
while we are yet at breakfast.'

'While we are yet at breakfast,' said Snitchey and Craggs, who 
seemed to have no present idea of leaving off.

Although Alfred had not been breakfasting, and seemed to have quite 
enough business on his hands as it was, he respectfully answered:

'If you please, sir.'

'If anything could be serious,' the Doctor began, 'in such a - '

'Farce as this, sir,' hinted Alfred.

'In such a farce as this,' observed the Doctor, 'it might be this 
recurrence, on the eve of separation, of a double birthday, which 
is connected with many associations pleasant to us four, and with 
the recollection of a long and amicable intercourse.  That's not to 
the purpose.'

'Ah! yes, yes, Dr. Jeddler,' said the young man.  'It is to the 
purpose.  Much to the purpose, as my heart bears witness this 
morning; and as yours does too, I know, if you would let it speak.  
I leave your house to-day; I cease to be your ward to-day; we part 
with tender relations stretching far behind us, that never can be 
exactly renewed, and with others dawning - yet before us,' he 
looked down at Marion beside him, 'fraught with such considerations 
as I must not trust myself to speak of now.  Come, come!' he added, 
rallying his spirits and the Doctor at once, 'there's a serious 
grain in this large foolish dust-heap, Doctor.  Let us allow to-
day, that there is One.'

'To-day!' cried the Doctor.  'Hear him!  Ha, ha, ha!  Of all days 
in the foolish year.  Why, on this day, the great battle was fought 
on this ground.  On this ground where we now sit, where I saw my 
two girls dance this morning, where the fruit has just been 
gathered for our eating from these trees, the roots of which are 
struck in Men, not earth, - so many lives were lost, that within my 
recollection, generations afterwards, a churchyard full of bones, 
and dust of bones, and chips of cloven skulls, has been dug up from 
underneath our feet here.  Yet not a hundred people in that battle 
knew for what they fought, or why; not a hundred of the 
inconsiderate rejoicers in the victory, why they rejoiced.  Not 
half a hundred people were the better for the gain or loss.  Not 
half-a-dozen men agree to this hour on the cause or merits; and 
nobody, in short, ever knew anything distinct about it, but the 
mourners of the slain.  Serious, too!' said the Doctor, laughing.  
'Such a system!'

'But, all this seems to me,' said Alfred, 'to be very serious.'

'Serious!' cried the Doctor.  'If you allowed such things to be 
serious, you must go mad, or die, or climb up to the top of a 
mountain, and turn hermit.'

'Besides - so long ago,' said Alfred.

'Long ago!' returned the Doctor.  'Do you know what the world has 
been doing, ever since?  Do you know what else it has been doing?  
I don't!'

'It has gone to law a little,' observed Mr. Snitchey, stirring his 
tea.

'Although the way out has been always made too easy,' said his 
partner.

'And you'll excuse my saying, Doctor,' pursued Mr. Snitchey, 
'having been already put a thousand times in possession of my 
opinion, in the course of our discussions, that, in its having gone 
to law, and in its legal system altogether, I do observe a serious 
side - now, really, a something tangible, and with a purpose and 
intention in it - '

Clemency Newcome made an angular tumble against the table, 
occasioning a sounding clatter among the cups and saucers.

'Heyday! what's the matter there?' exclaimed the Doctor.

'It's this evil-inclined blue bag,' said Clemency, 'always tripping 
up somebody!'

'With a purpose and intention in it, I was saying,' resumed 
Snitchey, 'that commands respect.  Life a farce, Dr. Jeddler?  With 
law in it?'

The Doctor laughed, and looked at Alfred.

'Granted, if you please, that war is foolish,' said Snitchey.  
'There we agree.  For example.  Here's a smiling country,' pointing 
it out with his fork, 'once overrun by soldiers - trespassers every 
man of 'em - and laid waste by fire and sword.  He, he, he!  The 
idea of any man exposing himself, voluntarily, to fire and sword!  
Stupid, wasteful, positively ridiculous; you laugh at your fellow-
creatures, you know, when you think of it!  But take this smiling 
country as it stands.  Think of the laws appertaining to real 
property; to the bequest and devise of real property; to the 
mortgage and redemption of real property; to leasehold, freehold, 
and copyhold estate; think,' said Mr. Snitchey, with such great 
emotion that he actually smacked his lips, 'of the complicated laws 
relating to title and proof of title, with all the contradictory 
precedents and numerous acts of parliament connected with them; 
think of the infinite number of ingenious and interminable chancery 
suits, to which this pleasant prospect may give rise; and 
acknowledge, Dr. Jeddler, that there is a green spot in the scheme 
about us!  I believe,' said Mr. Snitchey, looking at his partner, 
'that I speak for Self and Craggs?'

Mr. Craggs having signified assent, Mr. Snitchey, somewhat 
freshened by his recent eloquence, observed that he would take a 
little more beef and another cup of tea.

'I don't stand up for life in general,' he added, rubbing his hands 
and chuckling, 'it's full of folly; full of something worse.  
Professions of trust, and confidence, and unselfishness, and all 
that!  Bah, bah, bah!  We see what they're worth.  But, you mustn't 
laugh at life; you've got a game to play; a very serious game 
indeed!  Everybody's playing against you, you know, and you're 
playing against them.  Oh! it's a very interesting thing.  There 
are deep moves upon the board.  You must only laugh, Dr. Jeddler, 
when you win - and then not much.  He, he, he!  And then not much,' 
repeated Snitchey, rolling his head and winking his eye, as if he 
would have added, 'you may do this instead!'

'Well, Alfred!' cried the Doctor, 'what do you say now?'

'I say, sir,' replied Alfred, 'that the greatest favour you could 
do me, and yourself too, I am inclined to think, would be to try 
sometimes to forget this battle-field and others like it in that 
broader battle-field of Life, on which the sun looks every day.'

'Really, I'm afraid that wouldn't soften his opinions, Mr. Alfred,' 
said Snitchey.  'The combatants are very eager and very bitter in 
that same battle of Life.  There's a great deal of cutting and 
slashing, and firing into people's heads from behind.  There is 
terrible treading down, and trampling on.  It is rather a bad 
business.'

'I believe, Mr. Snitchey,' said Alfred, 'there are quiet victories 
and struggles, great sacrifices of self, and noble acts of heroism, 
in it - even in many of its apparent lightnesses and contradictions 
- not the less difficult to achieve, because they have no earthly 
chronicle or audience - done every day in nooks and corners, and in 
little households, and in men's and women's hearts - any one of 
which might reconcile the sternest man to such a world, and fill 
him with belief and hope in it, though two-fourths of its people 
were at war, and another fourth at law; and that's a bold word.'

Both the sisters listened keenly.

'Well, well!' said the Doctor, 'I am too old to be converted, even 
by my friend Snitchey here, or my good spinster sister, Martha 
Jeddler; who had what she calls her domestic trials ages ago, and 
has led a sympathising life with all sorts of people ever since; 
and who is so much of your opinion (only she's less reasonable and 
more obstinate, being a woman), that we can't agree, and seldom 
meet.  I was born upon this battle-field.  I began, as a boy, to 
have my thoughts directed to the real history of a battle-field.  
Sixty years have gone over my head, and I have never seen the 
Christian world, including Heaven knows how many loving mothers and 
good enough girls like mine here, anything but mad for a battle-
field.  The same contradictions prevail in everything.  One must 
either laugh or cry at such stupendous inconsistencies; and I 
prefer to laugh.'

Britain, who had been paying the profoundest and most melancholy 
attention to each speaker in his turn, seemed suddenly to decide in 
favour of the same preference, if a deep sepulchral sound that 
escaped him might be construed into a demonstration of risibility.  
His face, however, was so perfectly unaffected by it, both before 
and afterwards, that although one or two of the breakfast party 
looked round as being startled by a mysterious noise, nobody 
connected the offender with it.

Except his partner in attendance, Clemency Newcome; who rousing him 
with one of those favourite joints, her elbows, inquired, in a 
reproachful whisper, what he laughed at.

'Not you!' said Britain.

'Who then?'

'Humanity,' said Britain.  'That's the joke!'

'What between master and them lawyers, he's getting more and more 
addle-headed every day!' cried Clemency, giving him a lunge with 
the other elbow, as a mental stimulant.  'Do you know where you 
are?  Do you want to get warning?'

'I don't know anything,' said Britain, with a leaden eye and an 
immovable visage.  'I don't care for anything.  I don't make out 
anything.  I don't believe anything.  And I don't want anything.'

Although this forlorn summary of his general condition may have 
been overcharged in an access of despondency, Benjamin Britain - 
sometimes called Little Britain, to distinguish him from Great; as 
we might say Young England, to express Old England with a decided 
difference - had defined his real state more accurately than might 
be supposed.  For, serving as a sort of man Miles to the Doctor's 
Friar Bacon, and listening day after day to innumerable orations 
addressed by the Doctor to various people, all tending to show that 
his very existence was at best a mistake and an absurdity, this 
unfortunate servitor had fallen, by degrees, into such an abyss of 
confused and contradictory suggestions from within and without, 
that Truth at the bottom of her well, was on the level surface as 
compared with Britain in the depths of his mystification.  The only 
point he clearly comprehended, was, that the new element usually 
brought into these discussions by Snitchey and Craggs, never served 
to make them clearer, and always seemed to give the Doctor a 
species of advantage and confirmation.  Therefore, he looked upon 
the Firm as one of the proximate causes of his state of mind, and 
held them in abhorrence accordingly.

'But, this is not our business, Alfred,' said the Doctor.  'Ceasing 
to be my ward (as you have said) to-day; and leaving us full to the 
brim of such learning as the Grammar School down here was able to 
give you, and your studies in London could add to that, and such 
practical knowledge as a dull old country Doctor like myself could 
graft upon both; you are away, now, into the world.  The first term 
of probation appointed by your poor father, being over, away you go 
now, your own master, to fulfil his second desire.  And long before 
your three years' tour among the foreign schools of medicine is 
finished, you'll have forgotten us.  Lord, you'll forget us easily 
in six months!'

'If I do - But you know better; why should I speak to you!' said 
Alfred, laughing.

'I don't know anything of the sort,' returned the Doctor.  'What do 
you say, Marion?'

Marion, trifling with her teacup, seemed to say - but she didn't 
say it - that he was welcome to forget, if he could.  Grace pressed 
the blooming face against her cheek, and smiled.

'I haven't been, I hope, a very unjust steward in the execution of 
my trust,' pursued the Doctor; 'but I am to be, at any rate, 
formally discharged, and released, and what not this morning; and 
here are our good friends Snitchey and Craggs, with a bagful of 
papers, and accounts, and documents, for the transfer of the 
balance of the trust fund to you (I wish it was a more difficult 
one to dispose of, Alfred, but you must get to be a great man and 
make it so), and other drolleries of that sort, which are to be 
signed, sealed, and delivered.'

'And duly witnessed as by law required,' said Snitchey, pushing 
away his plate, and taking out the papers, which his partner 
proceeded to spread upon the table; 'and Self and Crags having been 
co-trustees with you, Doctor, in so far as the fund was concerned, 
we shall want your two servants to attest the signatures - can you 
read, Mrs. Newcome?'

'I an't married, Mister,' said Clemency.

'Oh!  I beg your pardon.  I should think not,' chuckled Snitchey, 
casting his eyes over her extraordinary figure.  'You CAN read?'

'A little,' answered Clemency.

'The marriage service, night and morning, eh?' observed the lawyer, 
jocosely.

'No,' said Clemency.  'Too hard.  I only reads a thimble.'

'Read a thimble!' echoed Snitchey.  'What are you talking about, 
young woman?'

Clemency nodded.  'And a nutmeg-grater.'

'Why, this is a lunatic! a subject for the Lord High Chancellor!' 
said Snitchey, staring at her.

- 'If possessed of any property,' stipulated Craggs.

Grace, however, interposing, explained that each of the articles in 
question bore an engraved motto, and so formed the pocket library 
of Clemency Newcome, who was not much given to the study of books.

'Oh, that's it, is it, Miss Grace!' said Snitchey.

'Yes, yes.  Ha, ha, ha!  I thought our friend was an idiot.  She 
looks uncommonly like it,' he muttered, with a supercilious glance.  
'And what does the thimble say, Mrs. Newcome?'

'I an't married, Mister,' observed Clemency.

'Well, Newcome.  Will that do?' said the lawyer.  'What does the 
thimble say, Newcome?'

How Clemency, before replying to this question, held one pocket 
open, and looked down into its yawning depths for the thimble which 
wasn't there, - and how she then held an opposite pocket open, and 
seeming to descry it, like a pearl of great price, at the bottom, 
cleared away such intervening obstacles as a handkerchief, an end 
of wax candle, a flushed apple, an orange, a lucky penny, a cramp 
bone, a padlock, a pair of scissors in a sheath more expressively 
describable as promising young shears, a handful or so of loose 
beads, several balls of cotton, a needle-case, a cabinet collection 
of curl-papers, and a biscuit, all of which articles she entrusted 
individually and separately to Britain to hold, - is of no 
consequence.

Nor how, in her determination to grasp this pocket by the throat 
and keep it prisoner (for it had a tendency to swing, and twist 
itself round the nearest corner), she assumed and calmly 
maintained, an attitude apparently inconsistent with the human 
anatomy and the laws of gravity.  It is enough that at last she 
triumphantly produced the thimble on her finger, and rattled the 
nutmeg-grater:  the literature of both those trinkets being 
obviously in course of wearing out and wasting away, through 
excessive friction.

'That's the thimble, is it, young woman?' said Mr. Snitchey, 
diverting himself at her expense.  'And what does the thimble say?'

'It says,' replied Clemency, reading slowly round as if it were a 
tower, 'For-get and For-give.'

Snitchey and Craggs laughed heartily.  'So new!' said Snitchey.  
'So easy!' said Craggs.  'Such a knowledge of human nature in it!' 
said Snitchey.  'So applicable to the affairs of life!' said 
Craggs.

'And the nutmeg-grater?' inquired the head of the Firm.

'The grater says,' returned Clemency, 'Do as you - wold - be - done 
by.'

'Do, or you'll be done brown, you mean,' said Mr. Snitchey.

'I don't understand,' retorted Clemency, shaking her head vaguely.  
'I an't no lawyer.'

'I am afraid that if she was, Doctor,' said Mr. Snitchey, turning 
to him suddenly, as if to anticipate any effect that might 
otherwise be consequent on this retort, 'she'd find it to be the 
golden rule of half her clients.  They are serious enough in that - 
whimsical as your world is - and lay the blame on us afterwards.  
We, in our profession, are little else than mirrors after all, Mr. 
Alfred; but, we are generally consulted by angry and quarrelsome 
people who are not in their best looks, and it's rather hard to 
quarrel with us if we reflect unpleasant aspects.  I think,' said 
Mr. Snitchey, 'that I speak for Self and Craggs?'

'Decidedly,' said Craggs.

'And so, if Mr. Britain will oblige us with a mouthful of ink,' 
said Mr. Snitchey, returning to the papers, 'we'll sign, seal, and 
deliver as soon as possible, or the coach will be coming past 
before we know where we are.'

If one might judge from his appearance, there was every probability 
of the coach coming past before Mr. Britain knew where HE was; for 
he stood in a state of abstraction, mentally balancing the Doctor 
against the lawyers, and the lawyers against the Doctor, and their 
clients against both, and engaged in feeble attempts to make the 
thimble and nutmeg-grater (a new idea to him) square with anybody's 
system of philosophy; and, in short, bewildering himself as much as 
ever his great namesake has done with theories and schools.  But, 
Clemency, who was his good Genius - though he had the meanest 
possible opinion of her understanding, by reason of her seldom 
troubling herself with abstract speculations, and being always at 
hand to do the right thing at the right time - having produced the 
ink in a twinkling, tendered him the further service of recalling 
him to himself by the application of her elbows; with which gentle 
flappers she so jogged his memory, in a more literal construction 
of that phrase than usual, that he soon became quite fresh and 
brisk.

How he laboured under an apprehension not uncommon to persons in 
his degree, to whom the use of pen and ink is an event, that he 
couldn't append his name to a document, not of his own writing, 
without committing himself in some shadowy manner, or somehow 
signing away vague and enormous sums of money; and how he 
approached the deeds under protest, and by dint of the Doctor's 
coercion, and insisted on pausing to look at them before writing 
(the cramped hand, to say nothing of the phraseology, being so much 
Chinese to him), and also on turning them round to see whether 
there was anything fraudulent underneath; and how, having signed 
his name, he became desolate as one who had parted with his 
property and rights; I want the time to tell.  Also, how the blue 
bag containing his signature, afterwards had a mysterious interest 
for him, and he couldn't leave it; also, how Clemency Newcome, in 
an ecstasy of laughter at the idea of her own importance and 
dignity, brooded over the whole table with her two elbows, like a 
spread eagle, and reposed her head upon her left arm as a 
preliminary to the formation of certain cabalistic characters, 
which required a deal of ink, and imaginary counterparts whereof 
she executed at the same time with her tongue.  Also, how, having 
once tasted ink, she became thirsty in that regard, as tame tigers 
are said to be after tasting another sort of fluid, and wanted to 
sign everything, and put her name in all kinds of places.  In 
brief, the Doctor was discharged of his trust and all its 
responsibilities; and Alfred, taking it on himself, was fairly 
started on the journey of life.

'Britain!' said the Doctor.  'Run to the gate, and watch for the 
coach.  Time flies, Alfred.'

'Yes, sir, yes,' returned the young man, hurriedly.  'Dear Grace! a 
moment!  Marion - so young and beautiful, so winning and so much 
admired, dear to my heart as nothing else in life is - remember!  I 
leave Marion to you!'

'She has always been a sacred charge to me, Alfred.  She is doubly 
so, now.  I will be faithful to my trust, believe me.'

'I do believe it, Grace.  I know it well.  Who could look upon your 
face, and hear your voice, and not know it!  Ah, Grace!  If I had 
your well-governed heart, and tranquil mind, how bravely I would 
leave this place to-day!'

'Would you?' she answered with a quiet smile.

'And yet, Grace - Sister, seems the natural word.'

'Use it!' she said quickly.  'I am glad to hear it.  Call me 
nothing else.'

'And yet, sister, then,' said Alfred, 'Marion and I had better have 
your true and steadfast qualities serving us here, and making us 
both happier and better.  I wouldn't carry them away, to sustain 
myself, if I could!'

'Coach upon the hill-top!' exclaimed Britain.

'Time flies, Alfred,' said the Doctor.

Marion had stood apart, with her eyes fixed upon the ground; but, 
this warning being given, her young lover brought her tenderly to 
where her sister stood, and gave her into her embrace.

'I have been telling Grace, dear Marion,' he said, 'that you are 
her charge; my precious trust at parting.  And when I come back and 
reclaim you, dearest, and the bright prospect of our married life 
lies stretched before us, it shall be one of our chief pleasures to 
consult how we can make Grace happy; how we can anticipate her 
wishes; how we can show our gratitude and love to her; how we can 
return her something of the debt she will have heaped upon us.'

The younger sister had one hand in his; the other rested on her 
sister's neck.  She looked into that sister's eyes, so calm, 
serene, and cheerful, with a gaze in which affection, admiration, 
sorrow, wonder, almost veneration, were blended.  She looked into 
that sister's face, as if it were the face of some bright angel.  
Calm, serene, and cheerful, the face looked back on her and on her 
lover.

'And when the time comes, as it must one day,' said Alfred, - 'I 
wonder it has never come yet, but Grace knows best, for Grace is 
always right - when SHE will want a friend to open her whole heart 
to, and to be to her something of what she has been to us - then, 
Marion, how faithful we will prove, and what delight to us to know 
that she, our dear good sister, loves and is loved again, as we 
would have her!'

Still the younger sister looked into her eyes, and turned not - 
even towards him.  And still those honest eyes looked back, so 
calm, serene, and cheerful, on herself and on her lover.

'And when all that is past, and we are old, and living (as we 
must!) together - close together - talking often of old times,' 
said Alfred - 'these shall be our favourite times among them - this 
day most of all; and, telling each other what we thought and felt, 
and hoped and feared at parting; and how we couldn't bear to say 
good bye - '

'Coach coming through the wood!' cried Britain.

'Yes!  I am ready - and how we met again, so happily in spite of 
all; we'll make this day the happiest in all the year, and keep it 
as a treble birth-day.  Shall we, dear?'

'Yes!' interposed the elder sister, eagerly, and with a radiant 
smile.  'Yes!  Alfred, don't linger.  There's no time.  Say good 
bye to Marion.  And Heaven be with you!'

He pressed the younger sister to his heart.  Released from his 
embrace, she again clung to her sister; and her eyes, with the same 
blended look, again sought those so calm, serene, and cheerful.

'Farewell, my boy!' said the Doctor.  'To talk about any serious 
correspondence or serious affections, and engagements and so forth, 
in such a - ha ha ha! - you know what I mean - why that, of course, 
would be sheer nonsense.  All I can say is, that if you and Marion 
should continue in the same foolish minds, I shall not object to 
have you for a son-in-law one of these days.'

'Over the bridge!' cried Britain.

'Let it come!' said Alfred, wringing the Doctor's hand stoutly.  
'Think of me sometimes, my old friend and guardian, as seriously as 
you can!  Adieu, Mr. Snitchey!  Farewell, Mr. Craggs!'

'Coming down the road!' cried Britain.

'A kiss of Clemency Newcome for long acquaintance' sake!  Shake 
hands, Britain!  Marion, dearest heart, good bye!  Sister Grace! 
remember!'

The quiet household figure, and the face so beautiful in its 
serenity, were turned towards him in reply; but Marion's look and 
attitude remained unchanged.

The coach was at the gate.  There was a bustle with the luggage.  
The coach drove away.  Marion never moved.

'He waves his hat to you, my love,' said Grace.  'Your chosen 
husband, darling.  Look!'

The younger sister raised her head, and, for a moment, turned it.  
Then, turning back again, and fully meeting, for the first time, 
those calm eyes, fell sobbing on her neck.

'Oh, Grace.  God bless you!  But I cannot bear to see it, Grace!  
It breaks my heart.'



CHAPTER II - Part The Second



SNITCHEY AND CRAGGS had a snug little office on the old Battle 
Ground, where they drove a snug little business, and fought a great 
many small pitched battles for a great many contending parties.  
Though it could hardly be said of these conflicts that they were 
running fights - for in truth they generally proceeded at a snail's 
pace - the part the Firm had in them came so far within the general 
denomination, that now they took a shot at this Plaintiff, and now 
aimed a chop at that Defendant, now made a heavy charge at an 
estate in Chancery, and now had some light skirmishing among an 
irregular body of small debtors, just as the occasion served, and 
the enemy happened to present himself.  The Gazette was an 
important and profitable feature in some of their fields, as in 
fields of greater renown; and in most of the Actions wherein they 
showed their generalship, it was afterwards observed by the 
combatants that they had had great difficulty in making each other 
out, or in knowing with any degree of distinctness what they were 
about, in consequence of the vast amount of smoke by which they 
were surrounded.

The offices of Messrs. Snitchey and Craggs stood convenient, with 
an open door down two smooth steps, in the market-place; so that 
any angry farmer inclining towards hot water, might tumble into it 
at once.  Their special council-chamber and hall of conference was 
an old back-room up-stairs, with a low dark ceiling, which seemed 
to be knitting its brows gloomily in the consideration of tangled 
points of law.  It was furnished with some high-backed leathern 
chairs, garnished with great goggle-eyed brass nails, of which, 
every here and there, two or three had fallen out - or had been 
picked out, perhaps, by the wandering thumbs and forefingers of 
bewildered clients.  There was a framed print of a great judge in 
it, every curl in whose dreadful wig had made a man's hair stand on 
end.  Bales of papers filled the dusty closets, shelves, and 
tables; and round the wainscot there were tiers of boxes, padlocked 
and fireproof, with people's names painted outside, which anxious 
visitors felt themselves, by a cruel enchantment, obliged to spell 
backwards and forwards, and to make anagrams of, while they sat, 
seeming to listen to Snitchey and Craggs, without comprehending one 
word of what they said.

Snitchey and Craggs had each, in private life as in professional 
existence, a partner of his own.  Snitchey and Craggs were the best 
friends in the world, and had a real confidence in one another; but 
Mrs. Snitchey, by a dispensation not uncommon in the affairs of 
life, was on principle suspicious of Mr. Craggs; and Mrs. Craggs 
was on principle suspicious of Mr. Snitchey.  'Your Snitcheys 
indeed,' the latter lady would observe, sometimes, to Mr. Craggs; 
using that imaginative plural as if in disparagement of an 
objectionable pair of pantaloons, or other articles not possessed 
of a singular number; 'I don't see what you want with your 
Snitcheys, for my part.  You trust a great deal too much to your 
Snitcheys, I think, and I hope you may never find my words come 
true.'  While Mrs. Snitchey would observe to Mr. Snitchey, of 
Craggs, 'that if ever he was led away by man he was led away by 
that man, and that if ever she read a double purpose in a mortal 
eye, she read that purpose in Craggs's eye.'  Notwithstanding this, 
however, they were all very good friends in general:  and Mrs. 
Snitchey and Mrs. Craggs maintained a close bond of alliance 
against 'the office,' which they both considered the Blue chamber, 
and common enemy, full of dangerous (because unknown) machinations.

In this office, nevertheless, Snitchey and Craggs made honey for 
their several hives.  Here, sometimes, they would linger, of a fine 
evening, at the window of their council-chamber overlooking the old 
battle-ground, and wonder (but that was generally at assize time, 
when much business had made them sentimental) at the folly of 
mankind, who couldn't always be at peace with one another and go to 
law comfortably.  Here, days, and weeks, and months, and years, 
passed over them:  their calendar, the gradually diminishing number 
of brass nails in the leathern chairs, and the increasing bulk of 
papers on the tables.  Here, nearly three years' flight had thinned 
the one and swelled the other, since the breakfast in the orchard; 
when they sat together in consultation at night.

Not alone; but, with a man of about thirty, or that time of life, 
negligently dressed, and somewhat haggard in the face, but well-
made, well-attired, and well-looking, who sat in the armchair of 
state, with one hand in his breast, and the other in his 
dishevelled hair, pondering moodily.  Messrs. Snitchey and Craggs 
sat opposite each other at a neighbouring desk.  One of the 
fireproof boxes, unpadlocked and opened, was upon it; a part of its 
contents lay strewn upon the table, and the rest was then in course 
of passing through the hands of Mr. Snitchey; who brought it to the 
candle, document by document; looked at every paper singly, as he 
produced it; shook his head, and handed it to Mr. Craggs; who 
looked it over also, shook his head, and laid it down.  Sometimes, 
they would stop, and shaking their heads in concert, look towards 
the abstracted client.  And the name on the box being Michael 
Warden, Esquire, we may conclude from these premises that the name 
and the box were both his, and that the affairs of Michael Warden, 
Esquire, were in a bad way.

'That's all,' said Mr. Snitchey, turning up the last paper.  
'Really there's no other resource.  No other resource.'

'All lost, spent, wasted, pawned, borrowed, and sold, eh?' said the 
client, looking up.

'All,' returned Mr. Snitchey.

'Nothing else to be done, you say?'

'Nothing at all.'

The client bit his nails, and pondered again.

'And I am not even personally safe in England?  You hold to that, 
do you?'

'In no part of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland,' 
replied Mr. Snitchey.

'A mere prodigal son with no father to go back to, no swine to 
keep, and no husks to share with them?  Eh?' pursued the client, 
rocking one leg over the other, and searching the ground with his 
eyes.

Mr. Snitchey coughed, as if to deprecate the being supposed to 
participate in any figurative illustration of a legal position.  
Mr. Craggs, as if to express that it was a partnership view of the 
subject, also coughed.

'Ruined at thirty!' said the client.  'Humph!'

'Not ruined, Mr. Warden,' returned Snitchey.  'Not so bad as that.  
You have done a good deal towards it, I must say, but you are not 
ruined.  A little nursing - '

'A little Devil,' said the client.

'Mr. Craggs,' said Snitchey, 'will you oblige me with a pinch of 
snuff?  Thank you, sir.'

As the imperturbable lawyer applied it to his nose with great 
apparent relish and a perfect absorption of his attention in the 
proceeding, the client gradually broke into a smile, and, looking 
up, said:

'You talk of nursing.  How long nursing?'

'How long nursing?' repeated Snitchey, dusting the snuff from his 
fingers, and making a slow calculation in his mind.  'For your 
involved estate, sir?  In good hands? S. and C.'s, say?  Six or 
seven years.'

'To starve for six or seven years!' said the client with a fretful 
laugh, and an impatient change of his position.

'To starve for six or seven years, Mr. Warden,' said Snitchey, 
'would be very uncommon indeed.  You might get another estate by 
showing yourself, the while.  But, we don't think you could do it - 
speaking for Self and Craggs - and consequently don't advise it.'

'What DO you advise?'

'Nursing, I say,' repeated Snitchey.  'Some few years of nursing by 
Self and Craggs would bring it round.  But to enable us to make 
terms, and hold terms, and you to keep terms, you must go away; you 
must live abroad.  As to starvation, we could ensure you some 
hundreds a-year to starve upon, even in the beginning - I dare say, 
Mr. Warden.'

'Hundreds,' said the client.  'And I have spent thousands!'

'That,' retorted Mr. Snitchey, putting the papers slowly back into 
the cast-iron box, 'there is no doubt about.  No doubt about,' he 
repeated to himself, as he thoughtfully pursued his occupation.

The lawyer very likely knew HIS man; at any rate his dry, shrewd, 
whimsical manner, had a favourable influence on the client's moody 
state, and disposed him to be more free and unreserved.  Or, 
perhaps the client knew HIS man, and had elicited such 
encouragement as he had received, to render some purpose he was 
about to disclose the more defensible in appearance.  Gradually 
raising his head, he sat looking at his immovable adviser with a 
smile, which presently broke into a laugh.

'After all,' he said, 'my iron-headed friend - '

Mr. Snitchey pointed out his partner.  'Self and - excuse me - 
Craggs.'

'I beg Mr. Craggs's pardon,' said the client.  'After all, my iron-
headed friends,' he leaned forward in his chair, and dropped his 
voice a little, 'you don't know half my ruin yet.'

Mr. Snitchey stopped and stared at him.  Mr. Craggs also stared.

'I am not only deep in debt,' said the client, 'but I am deep in - 
'

'Not in love!' cried Snitchey.

'Yes!' said the client, falling back in his chair, and surveying 
the Firm with his hands in his pockets.  'Deep in love.'

'And not with an heiress, sir?' said Snitchey.

'Not with an heiress.'

'Nor a rich lady?'

'Nor a rich lady that I know of - except in beauty and merit.'

'A single lady, I trust?' said Mr. Snitchey, with great expression.

'Certainly.'

'It's not one of Dr. Jeddler's daughters?' said Snitchey, suddenly 
squaring his elbows on his knees, and advancing his face at least a 
yard.

'Yes!' returned the client.

'Not his younger daughter?' said Snitchey.

'Yes!' returned the client.

'Mr. Craggs,' said Snitchey, much relieved, 'will you oblige me 
with another pinch of snuff?  Thank you!  I am happy to say it 
don't signify, Mr. Warden; she's engaged, sir, she's bespoke.  My 
partner can corroborate me.  We know the fact.'

'We know the fact,' repeated Craggs.

'Why, so do I perhaps,' returned the client quietly.  'What of 
that!  Are you men of the world, and did you never hear of a woman 
changing her mind?'

'There certainly have been actions for breach,' said Mr. Snitchey, 
'brought against both spinsters and widows, but, in the majority of 
cases - '

'Cases!' interposed the client, impatiently.  'Don't talk to me of 
cases.  The general precedent is in a much larger volume than any 
of your law books.  Besides, do you think I have lived six weeks in 
the Doctor's house for nothing?'

'I think, sir,' observed Mr. Snitchey, gravely addressing himself 
to his partner, 'that of all the scrapes Mr. Warden's horses have 
brought him into at one time and another - and they have been 
pretty numerous, and pretty expensive, as none know better than 
himself, and you, and I - the worst scrape may turn out to be, if 
he talks in this way, this having ever been left by one of them at 
the Doctor's garden wall, with three broken ribs, a snapped collar-
bone, and the Lord knows how many bruises.  We didn't think so much 
of it, at the time when we knew he was going on well under the 
Doctor's hands and roof; but it looks bad now, sir.  Bad?  It looks 
very bad.  Doctor Jeddler too - our client, Mr. Craggs.'

'Mr. Alfred Heathfield too - a sort of client, Mr. Snitchey,' said 
Craggs.

'Mr. Michael Warden too, a kind of client,' said the careless 
visitor, 'and no bad one either:  having played the fool for ten or 
twelve years.  However, Mr. Michael Warden has sown his wild oats 
now - there's their crop, in that box; and he means to repent and 
be wise.  And in proof of it, Mr. Michael Warden means, if he can, 
to marry Marion, the Doctor's lovely daughter, and to carry her 
away with him.'

'Really, Mr. Craggs,' Snitchey began.

'Really, Mr. Snitchey, and Mr. Craggs, partners both,' said the 
client, interrupting him; 'you know your duty to your clients, and 
you know well enough, I am sure, that it is no part of it to 
interfere in a mere love affair, which I am obliged to confide to 
you.  I am not going to carry the young lady off, without her own 
consent.  There's nothing illegal in it.  I never was Mr. 
Heathfield's bosom friend.  I violate no confidence of his.  I love 
where he loves, and I mean to win where he would win, if I can.'

'He can't, Mr. Craggs,' said Snitchey, evidently anxious and 
discomfited.  'He can't do it, sir.  She dotes on Mr. Alfred.'

'Does she?' returned the client.

'Mr. Craggs, she dotes on him, sir,' persisted Snitchey.

'I didn't live six weeks, some few months ago, in the Doctor's 
house for nothing; and I doubted that soon,' observed the client.  
'She would have doted on him, if her sister could have brought it 
about; but I watched them.  Marion avoided his name, avoided the 
subject:  shrunk from the least allusion to it, with evident 
distress.'

'Why should she, Mr. Craggs, you know?  Why should she, sir?' 
inquired Snitchey.

'I don't know why she should, though there are many likely 
reasons,' said the client, smiling at the attention and perplexity 
expressed in Mr. Snitchey's shining eye, and at his cautious way of 
carrying on the conversation, and making himself informed upon the 
subject; 'but I know she does.  She was very young when she made 
the engagement - if it may be called one, I am not even sure of 
that - and has repented of it, perhaps.  Perhaps - it seems a 
foppish thing to say, but upon my soul I don't mean it in that 
light - she may have fallen in love with me, as I have fallen in 
love with her.'

'He, he!  Mr. Alfred, her old playfellow too, you remember, Mr. 
Craggs,' said Snitchey, with a disconcerted laugh; 'knew her almost 
from a baby!'

'Which makes it the more probable that she may be tired of his 
idea,' calmly pursued the client, 'and not indisposed to exchange 
it for the newer one of another lover, who presents himself (or is 
presented by his horse) under romantic circumstances; has the not 
unfavourable reputation - with a country girl - of having lived 
thoughtlessly and gaily, without doing much harm to anybody; and 
who, for his youth and figure, and so forth - this may seem foppish 
again, but upon my soul I don't mean it in that light - might 
perhaps pass muster in a crowd with Mr. Alfred himself.'

There was no gainsaying the last clause, certainly; and Mr. 
Snitchey, glancing at him, thought so.  There was something 
naturally graceful and pleasant in the very carelessness of his 
air.  It seemed to suggest, of his comely face and well-knit 
figure, that they might be greatly better if he chose:  and that, 
once roused and made earnest (but he never had been earnest yet), 
he could be full of fire and purpose.  'A dangerous sort of 
libertine,' thought the shrewd lawyer, 'to seem to catch the spark 
he wants, from a young lady's eyes.'

'Now, observe, Snitchey,' he continued, rising and taking him by 
the button, 'and Craggs,' taking him by the button also, and 
placing one partner on either side of him, so that neither might 
evade him.  'I don't ask you for any advice.  You are right to keep 
quite aloof from all parties in such a matter, which is not one in 
which grave men like you could interfere, on any side.  I am 
briefly going to review in half-a-dozen words, my position and 
intention, and then I shall leave it to you to do the best for me, 
in money matters, that you can:  seeing, that, if I run away with 
the Doctor's beautiful daughter (as I hope to do, and to become 
another man under her bright influence), it will be, for the 
moment, more chargeable than running away alone.  But I shall soon 
make all that up in an altered life.'

'I think it will be better not to hear this, Mr. Craggs?' said 
Snitchey, looking at him across the client.

'I think not,' said Craggs. - Both listened attentively.

'Well!  You needn't hear it,' replied their client.  'I'll mention 
it, however.  I don't mean to ask the Doctor's consent, because he 
wouldn't give it me.  But I mean to do the Doctor no wrong or harm, 
because (besides there being nothing serious in such trifles, as he 
says) I hope to rescue his child, my Marion, from what I see - I 
KNOW - she dreads, and contemplates with misery:  that is, the 
return of this old lover.  If anything in the world is true, it is 
true that she dreads his return.  Nobody is injured so far.  I am 
so harried and worried here just now, that I lead the life of a 
flying-fish.  I skulk about in the dark, I am shut out of my own 
house, and warned off my own grounds; but, that house, and those 
grounds, and many an acre besides, will come back to me one day, as 
you know and say; and Marion will probably be richer - on your 
showing, who are never sanguine - ten years hence as my wife, than 
as the wife of Alfred Heathfield, whose return she dreads (remember 
that), and in whom or in any man, my passion is not surpassed.  Who 
is injured yet?  It is a fair case throughout.  My right is as good 
as his, if she decide in my favour; and I will try my right by her 
alone.  You will like to know no more after this, and I will tell 
you no more.  Now you know my purpose, and wants.  When must I 
leave here?'

'In a week,' said Snitchey.  'Mr. Craggs?'

'In something less, I should say,' responded Craggs.

'In a month,' said the client, after attentively watching the two 
faces.  'This day month.  To-day is Thursday.  Succeed or fail, on 
this day month I go.'

'It's too long a delay,' said Snitchey; 'much too long.  But let it 
be so.  I thought he'd have stipulated for three,' he murmured to 
himself.  'Are you going?  Good night, sir!'

'Good night!' returned the client, shaking hands with the Firm.

'You'll live to see me making a good use of riches yet.  Henceforth 
the star of my destiny is, Marion!'

'Take care of the stairs, sir,' replied Snitchey; 'for she don't 
shine there.  Good night!'

'Good night!'

So they both stood at the stair-head with a pair of office-candles, 
watching him down.  When he had gone away, they stood looking at 
each other.

'What do you think of all this, Mr. Craggs?' said Snitchey.

Mr. Craggs shook his head.

'It was our opinion, on the day when that release was executed, 
that there was something curious in the parting of that pair; I 
recollect,' said Snitchey.

'It was,' said Mr. Craggs.

'Perhaps he deceives himself altogether,' pursued Mr. Snitchey, 
locking up the fireproof box, and putting it away; 'or, if he 
don't, a little bit of fickleness and perfidy is not a miracle, Mr. 
Craggs.  And yet I thought that pretty face was very true.  I 
thought,' said Mr. Snitchey, putting on his great-coat (for the 
weather was very cold), drawing on his gloves, and snuffing out one 
candle, 'that I had even seen her character becoming stronger and 
more resolved of late.  More like her sister's.'

'Mrs. Craggs was of the same opinion,' returned Craggs.

'I'd really give a trifle to-night,' observed Mr. Snitchey, who was 
a good-natured man, 'if I could believe that Mr. Warden was 
reckoning without his host; but, light-headed, capricious, and 
unballasted as he is, he knows something of the world and its 
people (he ought to, for he has bought what he does know, dear 
enough); and I can't quite think that.  We had better not 
interfere:  we can do nothing, Mr. Craggs, but keep quiet.'

'Nothing,' returned Craggs.

'Our friend the Doctor makes light of such things,' said Mr. 
Snitchey, shaking his head.  'I hope he mayn't stand in need of his 
philosophy.  Our friend Alfred talks of the battle of life,' he 
shook his head again, 'I hope he mayn't be cut down early in the 
day.  Have you got your hat, Mr. Craggs?  I am going to put the 
other candle out.'  Mr. Craggs replying in the affirmative, Mr. 
Snitchey suited the action to the word, and they groped their way 
out of the council-chamber, now dark as the subject, or the law in 
general.


My story passes to a quiet little study, where, on that same night, 
the sisters and the hale old Doctor sat by a cheerful fireside.  
Grace was working at her needle.  Marion read aloud from a book 
before her.  The Doctor, in his dressing-gown and slippers, with 
his feet spread out upon the warm rug, leaned back in his easy-
chair, and listened to the book, and looked upon his daughters.

They were very beautiful to look upon.  Two better faces for a 
fireside, never made a fireside bright and sacred.  Something of 
the difference between them had been softened down in three years' 
time; and enthroned upon the clear brow of the younger sister, 
looking through her eyes, and thrilling in her voice, was the same 
earnest nature that her own motherless youth had ripened in the 
elder sister long ago.  But she still appeared at once the lovelier 
and weaker of the two; still seemed to rest her head upon her 
sister's breast, and put her trust in her, and look into her eyes 
for counsel and reliance.  Those loving eyes, so calm, serene, and 
cheerful, as of old.

'"And being in her own home,"' read Marion, from the book; '"her 
home made exquisitely dear by these remembrances, she now began to 
know that the great trial of her heart must soon come on, and could 
not be delayed.  O Home, our comforter and friend when others fall 
away, to part with whom, at any step between the cradle and the 
grave"'-

'Marion, my love!' said Grace.

'Why, Puss!' exclaimed her father, 'what's the matter?'

She put her hand upon the hand her sister stretched towards her, 
and read on; her voice still faltering and trembling, though she 
made an effort to command it when thus interrupted.

'"To part with whom, at any step between the cradle and the grave, 
is always sorrowful.  O Home, so true to us, so often slighted in 
return, be lenient to them that turn away from thee, and do not 
haunt their erring footsteps too reproachfully!  Let no kind looks, 
no well-remembered smiles, be seen upon thy phantom face.  Let no 
ray of affection, welcome, gentleness, forbearance, cordiality, 
shine from thy white head.  Let no old loving word, or tone, rise 
up in judgment against thy deserter; but if thou canst look harshly 
and severely, do, in mercy to the Penitent!"'

'Dear Marion, read no more to-night,' said Grace for she was 
weeping.

'I cannot,' she replied, and closed the book.  'The words seem all 
on fire!'

The Doctor was amused at this; and laughed as he patted her on the 
head.

'What! overcome by a story-book!' said Doctor Jeddler.  'Print and 
paper!  Well, well, it's all one.  It's as rational to make a 
serious matter of print and paper as of anything else.  But, dry 
your eyes, love, dry your eyes.  I dare say the heroine has got 
home again long ago, and made it up all round - and if she hasn't, 
a real home is only four walls; and a fictitious one, mere rags and 
ink.  What's the matter now?'

'It's only me, Mister,' said Clemency, putting in her head at the 
door.

'And what's the matter with YOU?' said the Doctor.

'Oh, bless you, nothing an't the matter with me,' returned Clemency 
- and truly too, to judge from her well-soaped face, in which there 
gleamed as usual the very soul of good-humour, which, ungainly as 
she was, made her quite engaging.  Abrasions on the elbows are not 
generally understood, it is true, to range within that class of 
personal charms called beauty-spots.  But, it is better, going 
through the world, to have the arms chafed in that narrow passage, 
than the temper:  and Clemency's was sound and whole as any 
beauty's in the land.

'Nothing an't the matter with me,' said Clemency, entering, 'but - 
come a little closer, Mister.'

The Doctor, in some astonishment, complied with this invitation.

'You said I wasn't to give you one before them, you know,' said 
Clemency.

A novice in the family might have supposed, from her extraordinary 
ogling as she said it, as well as from a singular rapture or 
ecstasy which pervaded her elbows, as if she were embracing 
herself, that 'one,' in its most favourable interpretation, meant a 
chaste salute.  Indeed the Doctor himself seemed alarmed, for the 
moment; but quickly regained his composure, as Clemency, having had 
recourse to both her pockets - beginning with the right one, going 
away to the wrong one, and afterwards coming back to the right one 
again - produced a letter from the Post-office.

'Britain was riding by on a errand,' she chuckled, handing it to 
the Doctor, 'and see the mail come in, and waited for it.  There's 
A. H. in the corner.  Mr. Alfred's on his journey home, I bet.  We 
shall have a wedding in the house - there was two spoons in my 
saucer this morning.  Oh Luck, how slow he opens it!'

All this she delivered, by way of soliloquy, gradually rising 
higher and higher on tiptoe, in her impatience to hear the news, 
and making a corkscrew of her apron, and a bottle of her mouth.  At 
last, arriving at a climax of suspense, and seeing the Doctor still 
engaged in the perusal of the letter, she came down flat upon the 
soles of her feet again, and cast her apron, as a veil, over her 
head, in a mute despair, and inability to bear it any longer.

'Here!  Girls!' cried the Doctor.  'I can't help it:  I never could 
keep a secret in my life.  There are not many secrets, indeed, 
worth being kept in such a - well! never mind that.  Alfred's 
coming home, my dears, directly.'

'Directly!' exclaimed Marion.

'What!  The story-book is soon forgotten!' said the Doctor, 
pinching her cheek.  'I thought the news would dry those tears.  
Yes.  "Let it be a surprise," he says, here.  But I can't let it be 
a surprise.  He must have a welcome.'

'Directly!' repeated Marion.

'Why, perhaps not what your impatience calls "directly,"' returned 
the doctor; 'but pretty soon too.  Let us see.  Let us see.  To-day 
is Thursday, is it not?  Then he promises to be here, this day 
month.'

'This day month!' repeated Marion, softly.

'A gay day and a holiday for us,' said the cheerful voice of her 
sister Grace, kissing her in congratulation.  'Long looked forward 
to, dearest, and come at last.'

She answered with a smile; a mournful smile, but full of sisterly 
affection.  As she looked in her sister's face, and listened to the 
quiet music of her voice, picturing the happiness of this return, 
her own face glowed with hope and joy.

And with a something else; a something shining more and more 
through all the rest of its expression; for which I have no name.  
It was not exultation, triumph, proud enthusiasm.  They are not so 
calmly shown.  It was not love and gratitude alone, though love and 
gratitude were part of it.  It emanated from no sordid thought, for 
sordid thoughts do not light up the brow, and hover on the lips, 
and move the spirit like a fluttered light, until the sympathetic 
figure trembles.

Dr. Jeddler, in spite of his system of philosophy - which he was 
continually contradicting and denying in practice, but more famous 
philosophers have done that - could not help having as much 
interest in the return of his old ward and pupil as if it had been 
a serious event.  So he sat himself down in his easy-chair again, 
stretched out his slippered feet once more upon the rug, read the 
letter over and over a great many times, and talked it over more 
times still.

'Ah!  The day was,' said the Doctor, looking at the fire, 'when you 
and he, Grace, used to trot about arm-in-arm, in his holiday time, 
like a couple of walking dolls.  You remember?'

'I remember,' she answered, with her pleasant laugh, and plying her 
needle busily.

'This day month, indeed!' mused the Doctor.  'That hardly seems a 
twelve month ago.  And where was my little Marion then!'

'Never far from her sister,' said Marion, cheerily, 'however 
little.  Grace was everything to me, even when she was a young 
child herself.'

'True, Puss, true,' returned the Doctor.  'She was a staid little 
woman, was Grace, and a wise housekeeper, and a busy, quiet, 
pleasant body; bearing with our humours and anticipating our 
wishes, and always ready to forget her own, even in those times.  I 
never knew you positive or obstinate, Grace, my darling, even then, 
on any subject but one.'

'I am afraid I have changed sadly for the worse, since,' laughed 
Grace, still busy at her work.  'What was that one, father?'

'Alfred, of course,' said the Doctor.  'Nothing would serve you but 
you must be called Alfred's wife; so we called you Alfred's wife; 
and you liked it better, I believe (odd as it seems now), than 
being called a Duchess, if we could have made you one.'

'Indeed?' said Grace, placidly.

'Why, don't you remember?' inquired the Doctor.

'I think I remember something of it,' she returned, 'but not much.  
It's so long ago.'  And as she sat at work, she hummed the burden 
of an old song, which the Doctor liked.

'Alfred will find a real wife soon,' she said, breaking off; 'and 
that will be a happy time indeed for all of us.  My three years' 
trust is nearly at an end, Marion.  It has been a very easy one.  I 
shall tell Alfred, when I give you back to him, that you have loved 
him dearly all the time, and that he has never once needed my good 
services.  May I tell him so, love?'

'Tell him, dear Grace,' replied Marion, 'that there never was a 
trust so generously, nobly, steadfastly discharged; and that I have 
loved YOU, all the time, dearer and dearer every day; and O! how 
dearly now!'

'Nay,' said her cheerful sister, returning her embrace, 'I can 
scarcely tell him that; we will leave my deserts to Alfred's 
imagination.  It will be liberal enough, dear Marion; like your 
own.'

With that, she resumed the work she had for a moment laid down, 
when her sister spoke so fervently:  and with it the old song the 
Doctor liked to hear.  And the Doctor, still reposing in his easy-
chair, with his slippered feet stretched out before him on the rug, 
listened to the tune, and beat time on his knee with Alfred's 
letter, and looked at his two daughters, and thought that among the 
many trifles of the trifling world, these trifles were agreeable 
enough.

Clemency Newcome, in the meantime, having accomplished her mission 
and lingered in the room until she had made herself a party to the 
news, descended to the kitchen, where her coadjutor, Mr. Britain, 
was regaling after supper, surrounded by such a plentiful 
collection of bright pot-lids, well-scoured saucepans, burnished 
dinner-covers, gleaming kettles, and other tokens of her 
industrious habits, arranged upon the walls and shelves, that he 
sat as in the centre of a hall of mirrors.  The majority did not 
give forth very flattering portraits of him, certainly; nor were 
they by any means unanimous in their reflections; as some made him 
very long-faced, others very broad-faced, some tolerably well-
looking, others vastly ill-looking, according to their several 
manners of reflecting:  which were as various, in respect of one 
fact, as those of so many kinds of men.  But they all agreed that 
in the midst of them sat, quite at his ease, an individual with a 
pipe in his mouth, and a jug of beer at his elbow, who nodded 
condescendingly to Clemency, when she stationed herself at the same 
table.

'Well, Clemmy,' said Britain, 'how are you by this time, and what's 
the news?'

Clemency told him the news, which he received very graciously.  A 
gracious change had come over Benjamin from head to foot.  He was 
much broader, much redder, much more cheerful, and much jollier in 
all respects.  It seemed as if his face had been tied up in a knot 
before, and was now untwisted and smoothed out.

'There'll be another job for Snitchey and Craggs, I suppose,' he 
observed, puffing slowly at his pipe.  'More witnessing for you and 
me, perhaps, Clemmy!'

'Lor!' replied his fair companion, with her favourite twist of her 
favourite joints.  'I wish it was me, Britain!'

'Wish what was you?'

'A-going to be married,' said Clemency.

Benjamin took his pipe out of his mouth and laughed heartily.  
'Yes! you're a likely subject for that!' he said.  'Poor Clem!'  
Clemency for her part laughed as heartily as he, and seemed as much 
amused by the idea.  'Yes,' she assented, 'I'm a likely subject for 
that; an't I?'

'YOU'LL never be married, you know,' said Mr. Britain, resuming his 
pipe.

'Don't you think I ever shall though?' said Clemency, in perfect 
good faith.

Mr. Britain shook his head.  'Not a chance of it!'

'Only think!' said Clemency.  'Well! - I suppose you mean to, 
Britain, one of these days; don't you?'

A question so abrupt, upon a subject so momentous, required 
consideration.  After blowing out a great cloud of smoke, and 
looking at it with his head now on this side and now on that, as if 
it were actually the question, and he were surveying it in various 
aspects, Mr. Britain replied that he wasn't altogether clear about 
it, but - ye-es - he thought he might come to that at last.

'I wish her joy, whoever she may be!' cried Clemency.

'Oh she'll have that,' said Benjamin, 'safe enough.'

'But she wouldn't have led quite such a joyful life as she will 
lead, and wouldn't have had quite such a sociable sort of husband 
as she will have,' said Clemency, spreading herself half over the 
table, and staring retrospectively at the candle, 'if it hadn't 
been for - not that I went to do it, for it was accidental, I am 
sure - if it hadn't been for me; now would she, Britain?'

'Certainly not,' returned Mr. Britain, by this time in that high 
state of appreciation of his pipe, when a man can open his mouth 
but a very little way for speaking purposes; and sitting 
luxuriously immovable in his chair, can afford to turn only his 
eyes towards a companion, and that very passively and gravely.  
'Oh!  I'm greatly beholden to you, you know, Clem.'

'Lor, how nice that is to think of!' said Clemency.

At the same time, bringing her thoughts as well as her sight to 
bear upon the candle-grease, and becoming abruptly reminiscent of 
its healing qualities as a balsam, she anointed her left elbow with 
a plentiful application of that remedy.

'You see I've made a good many investigations of one sort and 
another in my time,' pursued Mr. Britain, with the profundity of a 
sage, 'having been always of an inquiring turn of mind; and I've 
read a good many books about the general Rights of things and 
Wrongs of things, for I went into the literary line myself, when I 
began life.'

'Did you though!' cried the admiring Clemency.

'Yes,' said Mr. Britain:  'I was hid for the best part of two years 
behind a bookstall, ready to fly out if anybody pocketed a volume; 
and after that, I was light porter to a stay and mantua maker, in 
which capacity I was employed to carry about, in oilskin baskets, 
nothing but deceptions - which soured my spirits and disturbed my 
confidence in human nature; and after that, I heard a world of 
discussions in this house, which soured my spirits fresh; and my 
opinion after all is, that, as a safe and comfortable sweetener of 
the same, and as a pleasant guide through life, there's nothing 
like a nutmeg-grater.'

Clemency was about to offer a suggestion, but he stopped her by 
anticipating it.

'Com-bined,' he added gravely, 'with a thimble.'

'Do as you wold, you know, and cetrer, eh!' observed Clemency, 
folding her arms comfortably in her delight at this avowal, and 
patting her elbows.  'Such a short cut, an't it?'

'I'm not sure,' said Mr. Britain, 'that it's what would be 
considered good philosophy.  I've my doubts about that; but it 
wears well, and saves a quantity of snarling, which the genuine 
article don't always.'

'See how you used to go on once, yourself, you know!' said 
Clemency.

'Ah!' said Mr. Britain.  'But the most extraordinary thing, Clemmy, 
is that I should live to be brought round, through you.  That's the 
strange part of it.  Through you!  Why, I suppose you haven't so 
much as half an idea in your head.'

Clemency, without taking the least offence, shook it, and laughed 
and hugged herself, and said, 'No, she didn't suppose she had.'

'I'm pretty sure of it,' said Mr. Britain.

'Oh!  I dare say you're right,' said Clemency.  'I don't pretend to 
none.  I don't want any.'

Benjamin took his pipe from his lips, and laughed till the tears 
ran down his face.  'What a natural you are, Clemmy!' he said, 
shaking his head, with an infinite relish of the joke, and wiping 
his eyes.  Clemency, without the smallest inclination to dispute 
it, did the like, and laughed as heartily as he.

'I can't help liking you,' said Mr. Britain; 'you're a regular good 
creature in your way, so shake hands, Clem.  Whatever happens, I'll 
always take notice of you, and be a friend to you.'

'Will you?' returned Clemency.  'Well! that's very good of you.'

'Yes, yes,' said Mr. Britain, giving her his pipe to knock the 
ashes out of it; 'I'll stand by you.  Hark!  That's a curious 
noise!'

'Noise!' repeated Clemency.

'A footstep outside.  Somebody dropping from the wall, it sounded 
like,' said Britain.  'Are they all abed up-stairs?'

'Yes, all abed by this time,' she replied.

'Didn't you hear anything?'

'No.'

They both listened, but heard nothing.

'I tell you what,' said Benjamin, taking down a lantern.  'I'll 
have a look round, before I go to bed myself, for satisfaction's 
sake.  Undo the door while I light this, Clemmy.'

Clemency complied briskly; but observed as she did so, that he 
would only have his walk for his pains, that it was all his fancy, 
and so forth.  Mr. Britain said 'very likely;' but sallied out, 
nevertheless, armed with the poker, and casting the light of the 
lantern far and near in all directions.

'It's as quiet as a churchyard,' said Clemency, looking after him; 
'and almost as ghostly too!'

Glancing back into the kitchen, she cried fearfully, as a light 
figure stole into her view, 'What's that!'

'Hush!' said Marion in an agitated whisper.  'You have always loved 
me, have you not!'

'Loved you, child!  You may be sure I have.'

'I am sure.  And I may trust you, may I not?  There is no one else 
just now, in whom I CAN trust.'

'Yes,' said Clemency, with all her heart.

'There is some one out there,' pointing to the door, 'whom I must 
see, and speak with, to-night.  Michael Warden, for God's sake 
retire!  Not now!'

Clemency started with surprise and trouble as, following the 
direction of the speaker's eyes, she saw a dark figure standing in 
the doorway.

'In another moment you may be discovered,' said Marion.  'Not now!  
Wait, if you can, in some concealment.  I will come presently.'

He waved his hand to her, and was gone.  'Don't go to bed.  Wait 
here for me!' said Marion, hurriedly.  'I have been seeking to 
speak to you for an hour past.  Oh, be true to me!'

Eagerly seizing her bewildered hand, and pressing it with both her 
own to her breast - an action more expressive, in its passion of 
entreaty, than the most eloquent appeal in words, - Marion 
withdrew; as the light of the returning lantern flashed into the 
room.

'All still and peaceable.  Nobody there.  Fancy, I suppose,' said 
Mr. Britain, as he locked and barred the door.  'One of the effects 
of having a lively imagination.  Halloa!  Why, what's the matter?'

Clemency, who could not conceal the effects of her surprise and 
concern, was sitting in a chair:  pale, and trembling from head to 
foot.

'Matter!' she repeated, chafing her hands and elbows, nervously, 
and looking anywhere but at him.  'That's good in you, Britain, 
that is!  After going and frightening one out of one's life with 
noises and lanterns, and I don't know what all.  Matter!  Oh, yes!'

'If you're frightened out of your life by a lantern, Clemmy,' said 
Mr. Britain, composedly blowing it out and hanging it up again, 
'that apparition's very soon got rid of.  But you're as bold as 
brass in general,' he said, stopping to observe her; 'and were, 
after the noise and the lantern too.  What have you taken into your 
head?  Not an idea, eh?'

But, as Clemency bade him good night very much after her usual 
fashion, and began to bustle about with a show of going to bed 
herself immediately, Little Britain, after giving utterance to the 
original remark that it was impossible to account for a woman's 
whims, bade her good night in return, and taking up his candle 
strolled drowsily away to bed.

When all was quiet, Marion returned.

'Open the door,' she said; 'and stand there close beside me, while 
I speak to him, outside.'

Timid as her manner was, it still evinced a resolute and settled 
purpose, such as Clemency could not resist.  She softly unbarred 
the door:  but before turning the key, looked round on the young 
creature waiting to issue forth when she should open it.

The face was not averted or cast down, but looking full upon her, 
in its pride of youth and beauty.  Some simple sense of the 
slightness of the barrier that interposed itself between the happy 
home and honoured love of the fair girl, and what might be the 
desolation of that home, and shipwreck of its dearest treasure, 
smote so keenly on the tender heart of Clemency, and so filled it 
to overflowing with sorrow and compassion, that, bursting into 
tears, she threw her arms round Marion's neck.

'It's little that I know, my dear,' cried Clemency, 'very little; 
but I know that this should not be.  Think of what you do!'

'I have thought of it many times,' said Marion, gently.

'Once more,' urged Clemency.  'Till to-morrow.'  Marion shook her 
head.

'For Mr. Alfred's sake,' said Clemency, with homely earnestness.  
'Him that you used to love so dearly, once!'

She hid her face, upon the instant, in her hands, repeating 'Once!' 
as if it rent her heart.

'Let me go out,' said Clemency, soothing her.  'I'll tell him what 
you like.  Don't cross the door-step to-night.  I'm sure no good 
will come of it.  Oh, it was an unhappy day when Mr. Warden was 
ever brought here!  Think of your good father, darling - of your 
sister.'

'I have,' said Marion, hastily raising her head.  'You don't know 
what I do.  I MUST speak to him.  You are the best and truest 
friend in all the world for what you have said to me, but I must 
take this step.  Will you go with me, Clemency,' she kissed her on 
her friendly face, 'or shall I go alone?'

Sorrowing and wondering, Clemency turned the key, and opened the 
door.  Into the dark and doubtful night that lay beyond the 
threshold, Marion passed quickly, holding by her hand.

In the dark night he joined her, and they spoke together earnestly 
and long; and the hand that held so fast by Clemeney's, now 
trembled, now turned deadly cold, now clasped and closed on hers, 
in the strong feeling of the speech it emphasised unconsciously.  
When they returned, he followed to the door, and pausing there a 
moment, seized the other hand, and pressed it to his lips.  Then, 
stealthily withdrew.

The door was barred and locked again, and once again she stood 
beneath her father's roof.  Not bowed down by the secret that she 
brought there, though so young; but, with that same expression on 
her face for which I had no name before, and shining through her 
tears.

Again she thanked and thanked her humble friend, and trusted to 
her, as she said, with confidence, implicitly.  Her chamber safely 
reached, she fell upon her knees; and with her secret weighing on 
her heart, could pray!

Could rise up from her prayers, so tranquil and serene, and bending 
over her fond sister in her slumber, look upon her face and smile - 
though sadly:  murmuring as she kissed her forehead, how that Grace 
had been a mother to her, ever, and she loved her as a child!

Could draw the passive arm about her neck when lying down to rest - 
it seemed to cling there, of its own will, protectingly and 
tenderly even in sleep - and breathe upon the parted lips, God 
bless her!

Could sink into a peaceful sleep, herself; but for one dream, in 
which she cried out, in her innocent and touching voice, that she 
was quite alone, and they had all forgotten her.

A month soon passes, even at its tardiest pace.  The month 
appointed to elapse between that night and the return, was quick of 
foot, and went by, like a vapour.

The day arrived.  A raging winter day, that shook the old house, 
sometimes, as if it shivered in the blast.  A day to make home 
doubly home.  To give the chimney-corner new delights.  To shed a 
ruddier glow upon the faces gathered round the hearth, and draw 
each fireside group into a closer and more social league, against 
the roaring elements without.  Such a wild winter day as best 
prepares the way for shut-out night; for curtained rooms, and 
cheerful looks; for music, laughter, dancing, light, and jovial 
entertainment!

All these the Doctor had in store to welcome Alfred back.  They 
knew that he could not arrive till night; and they would make the 
night air ring, he said, as he approached.  All his old friends 
should congregate about him.  He should not miss a face that he had 
known and liked.  No!  They should every one be there!

So, guests were bidden, and musicians were engaged, and tables 
spread, and floors prepared for active feet, and bountiful 
provision made, of every hospitable kind.  Because it was the 
Christmas season, and his eyes were all unused to English holly and 
its sturdy green, the dancing-room was garlanded and hung with it; 
and the red berries gleamed an English welcome to him, peeping from 
among the leaves.

It was a busy day for all of them:  a busier day for none of them 
than Grace, who noiselessly presided everywhere, and was the 
cheerful mind of all the preparations.  Many a time that day (as 
well as many a time within the fleeting month preceding it), did 
Clemency glance anxiously, and almost fearfully, at Marion.  She 
saw her paler, perhaps, than usual; but there was a sweet composure 
on her face that made it lovelier than ever.

At night when she was dressed, and wore upon her head a wreath that 
Grace had proudly twined about it - its mimic flowers were Alfred's 
favourites, as Grace remembered when she chose them - that old 
expression, pensive, almost sorrowful, and yet so spiritual, high, 
and stirring, sat again upon her brow, enhanced a hundred-fold.

'The next wreath I adjust on this fair head, will be a marriage 
wreath,' said Grace; 'or I am no true prophet, dear.'

Her sister smiled, and held her in her arms.

'A moment, Grace.  Don't leave me yet.  Are you sure that I want 
nothing more?'

Her care was not for that.  It was her sister's face she thought 
of, and her eyes were fixed upon it, tenderly.

'My art,' said Grace, 'can go no farther, dear girl; nor your 
beauty.  I never saw you look so beautiful as now.'

'I never was so happy,' she returned.

'Ay, but there is a greater happiness in store.  In such another 
home, as cheerful and as bright as this looks now,' said Grace, 
'Alfred and his young wife will soon be living.'

She smiled again.  'It is a happy home, Grace, in your fancy.  I 
can see it in your eyes.  I know it WILL be happy, dear.  How glad 
I am to know it.'

'Well,' cried the Doctor, bustling in.  'Here we are, all ready for 
Alfred, eh?  He can't be here until pretty late - an hour or so 
before midnight - so there'll be plenty of time for making merry 
before he comes.  He'll not find us with the ice unbroken.  Pile up 
the fire here, Britain!  Let it shine upon the holly till it winks 
again.  It's a world of nonsense, Puss; true lovers and all the 
rest of it - all nonsense; but we'll be nonsensical with the rest 
of 'em, and give our true lover a mad welcome.  Upon my word!' said 
the old Doctor, looking at his daughters proudly, 'I'm not clear 
to-night, among other absurdities, but that I'm the father of two 
handsome girls.'

'All that one of them has ever done, or may do - may do, dearest 
father - to cause you pain or grief, forgive her,' said Marion, 
'forgive her now, when her heart is full.  Say that you forgive 
her.  That you will forgive her.  That she shall always share your 
love, and -,' and the rest was not said, for her face was hidden on 
the old man's shoulder.

'Tut, tut, tut,' said the Doctor gently.  'Forgive!  What have I to 
forgive?  Heyday, if our true lovers come back to flurry us like 
this, we must hold 'em at a distance; we must send expresses out to 
stop 'em short upon the road, and bring 'em on a mile or two a day, 
until we're properly prepared to meet 'em.  Kiss me, Puss.  
Forgive!  Why, what a silly child you are!  If you had vexed and 
crossed me fifty times a day, instead of not at all, I'd forgive 
you everything, but such a supplication.  Kiss me again, Puss.  
There!  Prospective and retrospective - a clear score between us.  
Pile up the fire here!  Would you freeze the people on this bleak 
December night!  Let us be light, and warm, and merry, or I'll not 
forgive some of you!'

So gaily the old Doctor carried it!  And the fire was piled up, and 
the lights were bright, and company arrived, and a murmuring of 
lively tongues began, and already there was a pleasant air of 
cheerful excitement stirring through all the house.

More and more company came flocking in.  Bright eyes sparkled upon 
Marion; smiling lips gave her joy of his return; sage mothers 
fanned themselves, and hoped she mightn't be too youthful and 
inconstant for the quiet round of home; impetuous fathers fell into 
disgrace for too much exaltation of her beauty; daughters envied 
her; sons envied him; innumerable pairs of lovers profited by the 
occasion; all were interested, animated, and expectant.

Mr. and Mrs. Craggs came arm in arm, but Mrs. Snitchey came alone.  
'Why, what's become of HIM?' inquired the Doctor.

The feather of a Bird of Paradise in Mrs. Snitchey's turban, 
trembled as if the Bird of Paradise were alive again, when she said 
that doubtless Mr. Craggs knew.  SHE was never told.

'That nasty office,' said Mrs. Craggs.

'I wish it was burnt down,' said Mrs. Snitchey.

'He's - he's - there's a little matter of business that keeps my 
partner rather late,' said Mr. Craggs, looking uneasily about him.

'Oh-h!  Business.  Don't tell me!' said Mrs. Snitchey.

'WE know what business means,' said Mrs. Craggs.

But their not knowing what it meant, was perhaps the reason why 
Mrs. Snitchey's Bird of Paradise feather quivered so portentously, 
and why all the pendant bits on Mrs. Craggs's ear-rings shook like 
little bells.

'I wonder YOU could come away, Mr. Craggs,' said his wife.

'Mr. Craggs is fortunate, I'm sure!' said Mrs. Snitchey.

'That office so engrosses 'em,' said Mrs. Craggs.

'A person with an office has no business to be married at all,' 
said Mrs. Snitchey.

Then, Mrs. Snitchey said, within herself, that that look of hers 
had pierced to Craggs's soul, and he knew it; and Mrs. Craggs 
observed to Craggs, that 'his Snitcheys' were deceiving him behind 
his back, and he would find it out when it was too late.

Still, Mr. Craggs, without much heeding these remarks, looked 
uneasily about until his eye rested on Grace, to whom he 
immediately presented himself.

'Good evening, ma'am,' said Craggs.  'You look charmingly.  Your - 
Miss - your sister, Miss Marion, is she - '

'Oh, she's quite well, Mr. Craggs.'

'Yes - I - is she here?' asked Craggs.

'Here!  Don't you see her yonder?  Going to dance?' said Grace.

Mr. Craggs put on his spectacles to see the better; looked at her 
through them, for some time; coughed; and put them, with an air of 
satisfaction, in their sheath again, and in his pocket.

Now the music struck up, and the dance commenced.  The bright fire 
crackled and sparkled, rose and fell, as though it joined the dance 
itself, in right good fellowship.  Sometimes, it roared as if it 
would make music too.  Sometimes, it flashed and beamed as if it 
were the eye of the old room:  it winked too, sometimes, like a 
knowing patriarch, upon the youthful whisperers in corners.  
Sometimes, it sported with the holly-boughs; and, shining on the 
leaves by fits and starts, made them look as if they were in the 
cold winter night again, and fluttering in the wind.  Sometimes its 
genial humour grew obstreperous, and passed all bounds; and then it 
cast into the room, among the twinkling feet, with a loud burst, a 
shower of harmless little sparks, and in its exultation leaped and 
bounded, like a mad thing, up the broad old chimney.

Another dance was near its close, when Mr. Snitchey touched his 
partner, who was looking on, upon the arm.

Mr. Craggs started, as if his familiar had been a spectre.

'Is he gone?' he asked.

'Hush!  He has been with me,' said Snitchey, 'for three hours and 
more.  He went over everything.  He looked into all our 
arrangements for him, and was very particular indeed.  He - Humph!'

The dance was finished.  Marion passed close before him, as he 
spoke.  She did not observe him, or his partner; but, looked over 
her shoulder towards her sister in the distance, as she slowly made 
her way into the crowd, and passed out of their view.

'You see!  All safe and well,' said Mr. Craggs.  'He didn't recur 
to that subject, I suppose?'

'Not a word.'

'And is he really gone?  Is he safe away?'

'He keeps to his word.  He drops down the river with the tide in 
that shell of a boat of his, and so goes out to sea on this dark 
night! - a dare-devil he is - before the wind.  There's no such 
lonely road anywhere else.  That's one thing.  The tide flows, he 
says, an hour before midnight - about this time.  I'm glad it's 
over.'  Mr. Snitchey wiped his forehead, which looked hot and 
anxious.

'What do you think,' said Mr. Craggs, 'about - '

'Hush!' replied his cautious partner, looking straight before him.  
'I understand you.  Don't mention names, and don't let us, seem to 
be talking secrets.  I don't know what to think; and to tell you 
the truth, I don't care now.  It's a great relief.  His self-love 
deceived him, I suppose.  Perhaps the young lady coquetted a 
little.  The evidence would seem to point that way.  Alfred not 
arrived?'

'Not yet,' said Mr. Craggs.  'Expected every minute.'

'Good.' Mr. Snitchey wiped his forehead again.  'It's a great 
relief.  I haven't been so nervous since we've been in partnership.  
I intend to spend the evening now, Mr. Craggs.'

Mrs. Craggs and Mrs. Snitchey joined them as he announced this 
intention.  The Bird of Paradise was in a state of extreme 
vibration, and the little bells were ringing quite audibly.

'It has been the theme of general comment, Mr. Snitchey,' said Mrs. 
Snitchey.  'I hope the office is satisfied.'

'Satisfied with what, my dear?' asked Mr. Snitchey.

'With the exposure of a defenceless woman to ridicule and remark,' 
returned his wife.  'That is quite in the way of the office, THAT 
is.'

'I really, myself,' said Mrs. Craggs, 'have been so long accustomed 
to connect the office with everything opposed to domesticity, that 
I am glad to know it as the avowed enemy of my peace.  There is 
something honest in that, at all events.'

'My dear,' urged Mr. Craggs, 'your good opinion is invaluable, but 
I never avowed that the office was the enemy of your peace.'

'No,' said Mrs. Craggs, ringing a perfect peal upon the little 
bells.  'Not you, indeed.  You wouldn't be worthy of the office, if 
you had the candour to.'

'As to my having been away to-night, my dear,' said Mr. Snitchey, 
giving her his arm, 'the deprivation has been mine, I'm sure; but, 
as Mr. Craggs knows - '

Mrs. Snitchey cut this reference very short by hitching her husband 
to a distance, and asking him to look at that man.  To do her the 
favour to look at him!

'At which man, my dear?' said Mr. Snitchey.

'Your chosen companion; I'M no companion to you, Mr. Snitchey.'

'Yes, yes, you are, my dear,' he interposed.

'No, no, I'm not,' said Mrs. Snitchey with a majestic smile.  'I 
know my station.  Will you look at your chosen companion, Mr. 
Snitchey; at your referee, at the keeper of your secrets, at the 
man you trust; at your other self, in short?'

The habitual association of Self with Craggs, occasioned Mr. 
Snitchey to look in that direction.

'If you can look that man in the eye this night,' said Mrs. 
Snitchey, 'and not know that you are deluded, practised upon, made 
the victim of his arts, and bent down prostrate to his will by some 
unaccountable fascination which it is impossible to explain and 
against which no warning of mine is of the least avail, all I can 
say is - I pity you!'

At the very same moment Mrs. Craggs was oracular on the cross 
subject.  Was it possible, she said, that Craggs could so blind 
himself to his Snitcheys, as not to feel his true position?  Did he 
mean to say that he had seen his Snitcheys come into that room, and 
didn't plainly see that there was reservation, cunning, treachery, 
in the man? Would he tell her that his very action, when he wiped 
his forehead and looked so stealthily about him, didn't show that 
there was something weighing on the conscience of his precious 
Snitcheys (if he had a conscience), that wouldn't bear the light?  
Did anybody but his Snitcheys come to festive entertainments like a 
burglar? - which, by the way, was hardly a clear illustration of 
the case, as he had walked in very mildly at the door.  And would 
he still assert to her at noon-day (it being nearly midnight), that 
his Snitcheys were to be justified through thick and thin, against 
all facts, and reason, and experience?

Neither Snitchey nor Craggs openly attempted to stem the current 
which had thus set in, but, both were content to be carried gently 
along it, until its force abated.  This happened at about the same 
time as a general movement for a country dance; when Mr. Snitchey 
proposed himself as a partner to Mrs. Craggs, and Mr. Craggs 
gallantly offered himself to Mrs. Snitchey; and after some such 
slight evasions as 'why don't you ask somebody else?' and 'you'll 
be glad, I know, if I decline,' and 'I wonder you can dance out of 
the office' (but this jocosely now), each lady graciously accepted, 
and took her place.

It was an old custom among them, indeed, to do so, and to pair off, 
in like manner, at dinners and suppers; for they were excellent 
friends, and on a footing of easy familiarity.  Perhaps the false 
Craggs and the wicked Snitchey were a recognised fiction with the 
two wives, as Doe and Roe, incessantly running up and down 
bailiwicks, were with the two husbands:  or, perhaps the ladies had 
instituted, and taken upon themselves, these two shares in the 
business, rather than be left out of it altogether.  But, certain 
it is, that each wife went as gravely and steadily to work in her 
vocation as her husband did in his, and would have considered it 
almost impossible for the Firm to maintain a successful and 
respectable existence, without her laudable exertions.

But, now, the Bird of Paradise was seen to flutter down the middle; 
and the little bells began to bounce and jingle in poussette; and 
the Doctor's rosy face spun round and round, like an expressive 
pegtop highly varnished; and breathless Mr. Craggs began to doubt 
already, whether country dancing had been made 'too easy,' like the 
rest of life; and Mr. Snitchey, with his nimble cuts and capers, 
footed it for Self and Craggs, and half-a-dozen more.

Now, too, the fire took fresh courage, favoured by the lively wind 
the dance awakened, and burnt clear and high.  It was the Genius of 
the room, and present everywhere.  It shone in people's eyes, it 
sparkled in the jewels on the snowy necks of girls, it twinkled at 
their ears as if it whispered to them slyly, it flashed about their 
waists, it flickered on the ground and made it rosy for their feet, 
it bloomed upon the ceiling that its glow might set off their 
bright faces, and it kindled up a general illumination in Mrs. 
Craggs's little belfry.

Now, too, the lively air that fanned it, grew less gentle as the 
music quickened and the dance proceeded with new spirit; and a 
breeze arose that made the leaves and berries dance upon the wall, 
as they had often done upon the trees; and the breeze rustled in 
the room as if an invisible company of fairies, treading in the 
foot-steps of the good substantial revellers, were whirling after 
them.  Now, too, no feature of the Doctor's face could be 
distinguished as he spun and spun; and now there seemed a dozen 
Birds of Paradise in fitful flight; and now there were a thousand 
little bells at work; and now a fleet of flying skirts was ruffled 
by a little tempest, when the music gave in, and the dance was 
over.

Hot and breathless as the Doctor was, it only made him the more 
impatient for Alfred's coming.

'Anything been seen, Britain?  Anything been heard?'

'Too dark to see far, sir.  Too much noise inside the house to 
hear.'

'That's right!  The gayer welcome for him.  How goes the time?'

'Just twelve, sir.  He can't be long, sir.'

'Stir up the fire, and throw another log upon it,' said the Doctor.  
'Let him see his welcome blazing out upon the night - good boy! - 
as he comes along!'

He saw it - Yes!  From the chaise he caught the light, as he turned 
the corner by the old church.  He knew the room from which it 
shone.  He saw the wintry branches of the old trees between the 
light and him.  He knew that one of those trees rustled musically 
in the summer time at the window of Marion's chamber.

The tears were in his eyes.  His heart throbbed so violently that 
he could hardly bear his happiness.  How often he had thought of 
this time - pictured it under all circumstances - feared that it 
might never come - yearned, and wearied for it - far away!

Again the light!  Distinct and ruddy; kindled, he knew, to give him 
welcome, and to speed him home.  He beckoned with his hand, and 
waved his hat, and cheered out, loud, as if the light were they, 
and they could see and hear him, as he dashed towards them through 
the mud and mire, triumphantly.

Stop!  He knew the Doctor, and understood what he had done.  He 
would not let it be a surprise to them.  But he could make it one, 
yet, by going forward on foot.  If the orchard-gate were open, he 
could enter there; if not, the wall was easily climbed, as he knew 
of old; and he would be among them in an instant.

He dismounted from the chaise, and telling the driver - even that 
was not easy in his agitation - to remain behind for a few minutes, 
and then to follow slowly, ran on with exceeding swiftness, tried 
the gate, scaled the wall, jumped down on the other side, and stood 
panting in the old orchard.

There was a frosty rime upon the trees, which, in the faint light 
of the clouded moon, hung upon the smaller branches like dead 
garlands.  Withered leaves crackled and snapped beneath his feet, 
as he crept softly on towards the house.  The desolation of a 
winter night sat brooding on the earth, and in the sky.  But, the 
red light came cheerily towards him from the windows; figures 
passed and repassed there; and the hum and murmur of voices greeted 
his ear sweetly.

Listening for hers:  attempting, as he crept on, to detach it from 
the rest, and half believing that he heard it:  he had nearly 
reached the door, when it was abruptly opened, and a figure coming 
out encountered his.  It instantly recoiled with a half-suppressed 
cry.

'Clemency,' he said, 'don't you know me?'

'Don't come in!' she answered, pushing him back.  'Go away.  Don't 
ask me why.  Don't come in.'

'What is the matter?' he exclaimed.

'I don't know.  I - I am afraid to think.  Go back.  Hark!'

There was a sudden tumult in the house.  She put her hands upon her 
ears.  A wild scream, such as no hands could shut out, was heard; 
and Grace - distraction in her looks and manner - rushed out at the 
door.

'Grace!'  He caught her in his arms.  'What is it!  Is she dead!'

She disengaged herself, as if to recognise his face, and fell down 
at his feet.

A crowd of figures came about them from the house.  Among them was 
her father, with a paper in his hand.

'What is it!' cried Alfred, grasping his hair with his hands, and 
looking in an agony from face to face, as he bent upon his knee 
beside the insensible girl.  'Will no one look at me?  Will no one 
speak to me?  Does no one know me?  Is there no voice among you 
all, to tell me what it is!'

There was a murmur among them.  'She is gone.'

'Gone!' he echoed.

'Fled, my dear Alfred!' said the Doctor, in a broken voice, and 
with his hands before his face.  'Gone from her home and us.  To-
night!  She writes that she has made her innocent and blameless 
choice - entreats that we will forgive her - prays that we will not 
forget her - and is gone.'

'With whom?  Where?'

He started up, as if to follow in pursuit; but, when they gave way 
to let him pass, looked wildly round upon them, staggered back, and 
sunk down in his former attitude, clasping one of Grace's cold 
hands in his own.

There was a hurried running to and fro, confusion, noise, disorder, 
and no purpose.  Some proceeded to disperse themselves about the 
roads, and some took horse, and some got lights, and some conversed 
together, urging that there was no trace or track to follow.  Some 
approached him kindly, with the view of offering consolation; some 
admonished him that Grace must be removed into the house, and that 
he prevented it.  He never heard them, and he never moved.

The snow fell fast and thick.  He looked up for a moment in the 
air, and thought that those white ashes strewn upon his hopes and 
misery, were suited to them well.  He looked round on the whitening 
ground, and thought how Marion's foot-prints would be hushed and 
covered up, as soon as made, and even that remembrance of her 
blotted out.  But he never felt the weather and he never stirred.



CHAPTER III - Part The Third



THE world had grown six years older since that night of the return.  
It was a warm autumn afternoon, and there had been heavy rain.  The 
sun burst suddenly from among the clouds; and the old battle-
ground, sparkling brilliantly and cheerfully at sight of it in one 
green place, flashed a responsive welcome there, which spread along 
the country side as if a joyful beacon had been lighted up, and 
answered from a thousand stations.

How beautiful the landscape kindling in the light, and that 
luxuriant influence passing on like a celestial presence, 
brightening everything!  The wood, a sombre mass before, revealed 
its varied tints of yellow, green, brown, red:  its different forms 
of trees, with raindrops glittering on their leaves and twinkling 
as they fell.  The verdant meadow-land, bright and glowing, seemed 
as if it had been blind, a minute since, and now had found a sense 
of sight where-with to look up at the shining sky.  Corn-fields, 
hedge-rows, fences, homesteads, and clustered roofs, the steeple of 
the church, the stream, the water-mill, all sprang out of the 
gloomy darkness smiling.  Birds sang sweetly, flowers raised their 
drooping heads, fresh scents arose from the invigorated ground; the 
blue expanse above extended and diffused itself; already the sun's 
slanting rays pierced mortally the sullen bank of cloud that 
lingered in its flight; and a rainbow, spirit of all the colours 
that adorned the earth and sky, spanned the whole arch with its 
triumphant glory.

At such a time, one little roadside Inn, snugly sheltered behind a 
great elm-tree with a rare seat for idlers encircling its capacious 
bole, addressed a cheerful front towards the traveller, as a house 
of entertainment ought, and tempted him with many mute but 
significant assurances of a comfortable welcome.  The ruddy sign-
board perched up in the tree, with its golden letters winking in 
the sun, ogled the passer-by, from among the green leaves, like a 
jolly face, and promised good cheer.  The horse-trough, full of 
clear fresh water, and the ground below it sprinkled with droppings 
of fragrant hay, made every horse that passed, prick up his ears.  
The crimson curtains in the lower rooms, and the pure white 
hangings in the little bed-chambers above, beckoned, Come in! with 
every breath of air.  Upon the bright green shutters, there were 
golden legends about beer and ale, and neat wines, and good beds; 
and an affecting picture of a brown jug frothing over at the top.  
Upon the window-sills were flowering plants in bright red pots, 
which made a lively show against the white front of the house; and 
in the darkness of the doorway there were streaks of light, which 
glanced off from the surfaces of bottles and tankards.

On the door-step, appeared a proper figure of a landlord, too; for, 
though he was a short man, he was round and broad, and stood with 
his hands in his pockets, and his legs just wide enough apart to 
express a mind at rest upon the subject of the cellar, and an easy 
confidence - too calm and virtuous to become a swagger - in the 
general resources of the Inn.  The superabundant moisture, 
trickling from everything after the late rain, set him off well.  
Nothing near him was thirsty.  Certain top-heavy dahlias, looking 
over the palings of his neat well-ordered garden, had swilled as 
much as they could carry - perhaps a trifle more - and may have 
been the worse for liquor; but the sweet-briar, roses, wall-
flowers, the plants at the windows, and the leaves on the old tree, 
were in the beaming state of moderate company that had taken no 
more than was wholesome for them, and had served to develop their 
best qualities.  Sprinkling dewy drops about them on the ground, 
they seemed profuse of innocent and sparkling mirth, that did good 
where it lighted, softening neglected corners which the steady rain 
could seldom reach, and hurting nothing.

This village Inn had assumed, on being established, an uncommon 
sign.  It was called The Nutmeg-Grater.  And underneath that 
household word, was inscribed, up in the tree, on the same flaming 
board, and in the like golden characters, By Benjamin Britain.

At a second glance, and on a more minute examination of his face, 
you might have known that it was no other than Benjamin Britain 
himself who stood in the doorway - reasonably changed by time, but 
for the better; a very comfortable host indeed.

'Mrs. B.,' said Mr. Britain, looking down the road, 'is rather 
late.  It's tea-time.'

As there was no Mrs. Britain coming, he strolled leisurely out into 
the road and looked up at the house, very much to his satisfaction.  
'It's just the sort of house,' said Benjamin, 'I should wish to 
stop at, if I didn't keep it.'

Then, he strolled towards the garden-paling, and took a look at the 
dahlias.  They looked over at him, with a helpless drowsy hanging 
of their heads:  which bobbed again, as the heavy drops of wet 
dripped off them.

'You must be looked after,' said Benjamin.  'Memorandum, not to 
forget to tell her so.  She's a long time coming!'

Mr. Britain's better half seemed to be by so very much his better 
half, that his own moiety of himself was utterly cast away and 
helpless without her.

'She hadn't much to do, I think,' said Ben.  'There were a few 
little matters of business after market, but not many.  Oh! here we 
are at last!'

A chaise-cart, driven by a boy, came clattering along the road:  
and seated in it, in a chair, with a large well-saturated umbrella 
spread out to dry behind her, was the plump figure of a matronly 
woman, with her bare arms folded across a basket which she carried 
on her knee, several other baskets and parcels lying crowded around 
her, and a certain bright good nature in her face and contented 
awkwardness in her manner, as she jogged to and fro with the motion 
of her carriage, which smacked of old times, even in the distance.  
Upon her nearer approach, this relish of by-gone days was not 
diminished; and when the cart stopped at the Nutmeg-Grater door, a 
pair of shoes, alighting from it, slipped nimbly through Mr. 
Britain's open arms, and came down with a substantial weight upon 
the pathway, which shoes could hardly have belonged to any one but 
Clemency Newcome.

In fact they did belong to her, and she stood in them, and a rosy 
comfortable-looking soul she was:  with as much soap on her glossy 
face as in times of yore, but with whole elbows now, that had grown 
quite dimpled in her improved condition.

'You're late, Clemmy!' said Mr. Britain.

'Why, you see, Ben, I've had a deal to do!' she replied, looking 
busily after the safe removal into the house of all the packages 
and baskets:  'eight, nine, ten - where's eleven?  Oh! my basket's 
eleven!  It's all right.  Put the horse up, Harry, and if he coughs 
again give him a warm mash to-night.  Eight, nine, ten.  Why, 
where's eleven?  Oh! forgot, it's all right.  How's the children, 
Ben?'

'Hearty, Clemmy, hearty.'

'Bless their precious faces!' said Mrs. Britain, unbonneting her 
own round countenance (for she and her husband were by this time in 
the bar), and smoothing her hair with her open hands.  'Give us a 
kiss, old man!'

Mr. Britain promptly complied.

'I think,' said Mrs. Britain, applying herself to her pockets and 
drawing forth an immense bulk of thin books and crumpled papers:  a 
very kennel of dogs'-ears:  'I've done everything.  Bills all 
settled - turnips sold - brewer's account looked into and paid - 
'bacco pipes ordered - seventeen pound four, paid into the Bank - 
Doctor Heathfield's charge for little Clem - you'll guess what that 
is - Doctor Heathfield won't take nothing again, Ben.'

'I thought he wouldn't,' returned Ben.

'No.  He says whatever family you was to have, Ben, he'd never put 
you to the cost of a halfpenny.  Not if you was to have twenty.'

Mr. Britain's face assumed a serious expression, and he looked hard 
at the wall.

'An't it kind of him?' said Clemency.

'Very,' returned Mr. Britain.  'It's the sort of kindness that I 
wouldn't presume upon, on any account.'

'No,' retorted Clemency.  'Of course not.  Then there's the pony - 
he fetched eight pound two; and that an't bad, is it?'

'It's very good,' said Ben.

'I'm glad you're pleased!' exclaimed his wife.  'I thought you 
would be; and I think that's all, and so no more at present from 
yours and cetrer, C. Britain.  Ha ha ha! There!  Take all the 
papers, and lock 'em up.  Oh!  Wait a minute.  Here's a printed 
bill to stick on the wall.  Wet from the printer's.  How nice it 
smells!'

'What's this?' said Ben, looking over the document.

'I don't know,' replied his wife.  'I haven't read a word of it.'

'"To be sold by Auction,"' read the host of the Nutmeg-Grater, 
'"unless previously disposed of by private contract."'

'They always put that,' said Clemency.

'Yes, but they don't always put this,' he returned.  'Look here, 
"Mansion," &c. - "offices," &c., "shrubberies," &c., "ring fence," 
&c. "Messrs. Snitchey and Craggs," &c., "ornamental portion of the 
unencumbered freehold property of Michael Warden, Esquire, 
intending to continue to reside abroad"!'

'Intending to continue to reside abroad!' repeated Clemency.

'Here it is,' said Britain.  'Look!'

'And it was only this very day that I heard it whispered at the old 
house, that better and plainer news had been half promised of her, 
soon!' said Clemency, shaking her head sorrowfully, and patting her 
elbows as if the recollection of old times unconsciously awakened 
her old habits.  'Dear, dear, dear!  There'll be heavy hearts, Ben, 
yonder.'

Mr. Britain heaved a sigh, and shook his head, and said he couldn't 
make it out:  he had left off trying long ago.  With that remark, 
he applied himself to putting up the bill just inside the bar 
window.  Clemency, after meditating in silence for a few moments, 
roused herself, cleared her thoughtful brow, and bustled off to 
look after the children.

Though the host of the Nutmeg-Grater had a lively regard for his 
good-wife, it was of the old patronising kind, and she amused him 
mightily.  Nothing would have astonished him so much, as to have 
known for certain from any third party, that it was she who managed 
the whole house, and made him, by her plain straightforward thrift, 
good-humour, honesty, and industry, a thriving man.  So easy it is, 
in any degree of life (as the world very often finds it), to take 
those cheerful natures that never assert their merit, at their own 
modest valuation; and to conceive a flippant liking of people for 
their outward oddities and eccentricities, whose innate worth, if 
we would look so far, might make us blush in the comparison!

It was comfortable to Mr. Britain, to think of his own 
condescension in having married Clemency.  She was a perpetual 
testimony to him of the goodness of his heart, and the kindness of 
his disposition; and he felt that her being an excellent wife was 
an illustration of the old precept that virtue is its own reward.

He had finished wafering up the bill, and had locked the vouchers 
for her day's proceedings in the cupboard - chuckling all the time, 
over her capacity for business - when, returning with the news that 
the two Master Britains were playing in the coach-house under the 
superintendence of one Betsey, and that little Clem was sleeping 
'like a picture,' she sat down to tea, which had awaited her 
arrival, on a little table.  It was a very neat little bar, with 
the usual display of bottles and glasses; a sedate clock, right to 
the minute (it was half-past five); everything in its place, and 
everything furbished and polished up to the very utmost.

'It's the first time I've sat down quietly to-day, I declare,' said 
Mrs. Britain, taking a long breath, as if she had sat down for the 
night; but getting up again immediately to hand her husband his 
tea, and cut him his bread-and-butter; 'how that bill does set me 
thinking of old times!'

'Ah!' said Mr. Britain, handling his saucer like an oyster, and 
disposing of its contents on the same principle.

'That same Mr. Michael Warden,' said Clemency, shaking her head at 
the notice of sale, 'lost me my old place.'

'And got you your husband,' said Mr. Britain.

'Well!  So he did,' retorted Clemency, 'and many thanks to him.'

'Man's the creature of habit,' said Mr. Britain, surveying her, 
over his saucer.  'I had somehow got used to you, Clem; and I found 
I shouldn't be able to get on without you.  So we went and got made 
man and wife.  Ha! ha!  We!  Who'd have thought it!'

'Who indeed!' cried Clemency.  'It was very good of you, Ben.'

'No, no, no,' replied Mr. Britain, with an air of self-denial.  
'Nothing worth mentioning.'

'Oh yes it was, Ben,' said his wife, with great simplicity; 'I'm 
sure I think so, and am very much obliged to you.  Ah!' looking 
again at the bill; 'when she was known to be gone, and out of 
reach, dear girl, I couldn't help telling - for her sake quite as 
much as theirs - what I knew, could I?'

'You told it, anyhow,' observed her husband.

'And Dr. Jeddler,' pursued Clemency, putting down her tea-cup, and 
looking thoughtfully at the bill, 'in his grief and passion turned 
me out of house and home!  I never have been so glad of anything in 
all my life, as that I didn't say an angry word to him, and hadn't 
any angry feeling towards him, even then; for he repented that 
truly, afterwards.  How often he has sat in this room, and told me 
over and over again he was sorry for it! - the last time, only 
yesterday, when you were out.  How often he has sat in this room, 
and talked to me, hour after hour, about one thing and another, in 
which he made believe to be interested! - but only for the sake of 
the days that are gone by, and because he knows she used to like 
me, Ben!'

'Why, how did you ever come to catch a glimpse of that, Clem?' 
asked her husband:  astonished that she should have a distinct 
perception of a truth which had only dimly suggested itself to his 
inquiring mind.

'I don't know, I'm sure,' said Clemency, blowing her tea, to cool 
it.  'Bless you, I couldn't tell you, if you was to offer me a 
reward of a hundred pound.'

He might have pursued this metaphysical subject but for her 
catching a glimpse of a substantial fact behind him, in the shape 
of a gentleman attired in mourning, and cloaked and booted like a 
rider on horseback, who stood at the bar-door.  He seemed attentive 
to their conversation, and not at all impatient to interrupt it.

Clemency hastily rose at this sight.  Mr. Britain also rose and 
saluted the guest.  'Will you please to walk up-stairs, sir?  
There's a very nice room up-stairs, sir.'

'Thank you,' said the stranger, looking earnestly at Mr. Britain's 
wife.  'May I come in here?'

'Oh, surely, if you like, sir,' returned Clemency, admitting him.

'What would you please to want, sir?'

The bill had caught his eye, and he was reading it.

'Excellent property that, sir,' observed Mr. Britain.

He made no answer; but, turning round, when he had finished 
reading, looked at Clemency with the same observant curiosity as 
before.  'You were asking me,' - he said, still looking at her, - 
'What you would please to take, sir,' answered Clemency, stealing a 
glance at him in return.

'If you will let me have a draught of ale,' he said, moving to a 
table by the window, 'and will let me have it here, without being 
any interruption to your meal, I shall be much obliged to you.'  He 
sat down as he spoke, without any further parley, and looked out at 
the prospect.  He was an easy, well-knit figure of a man in the 
prime of life.  His face, much browned by the sun, was shaded by a 
quantity of dark hair; and he wore a moustache.  His beer being set 
before him, he filled out a glass, and drank, good-humouredly, to 
the house; adding, as he put the tumbler down again:

'It's a new house, is it not?'

'Not particularly new, sir,' replied Mr. Britain.

'Between five and six years old,' said Clemency; speaking very 
distinctly.

'I think I heard you mention Dr. Jeddler's name, as I came in,' 
inquired the stranger.  'That bill reminds me of him; for I happen 
to know something of that story, by hearsay, and through certain 
connexions of mine. - Is the old man living?'

'Yes, he's living, sir,' said Clemency.

'Much changed?'

'Since when, sir?' returned Clemency, with remarkable emphasis and 
expression.

'Since his daughter - went away.'

'Yes! he's greatly changed since then,' said Clemency.  'He's grey 
and old, and hasn't the same way with him at all; but, I think he's 
happy now.  He has taken on with his sister since then, and goes to 
see her very often.  That did him good, directly.  At first, he was 
sadly broken down; and it was enough to make one's heart bleed, to 
see him wandering about, railing at the world; but a great change 
for the better came over him after a year or two, and then he began 
to like to talk about his lost daughter, and to praise her, ay and 
the world too! and was never tired of saying, with the tears in his 
poor eyes, how beautiful and good she was.  He had forgiven her 
then.  That was about the same time as Miss Grace's marriage.  
Britain, you remember?'

Mr. Britain remembered very well.

'The sister is married then,' returned the stranger.  He paused for 
some time before he asked, 'To whom?'

Clemency narrowly escaped oversetting the tea-board, in her emotion 
at this question.

'Did YOU never hear?' she said.

'I should like to hear,' he replied, as he filled his glass again, 
and raised it to his lips.

'Ah!  It would be a long story, if it was properly told,' said 
Clemency, resting her chin on the palm of her left hand, and 
supporting that elbow on her right hand, as she shook her head, and 
looked back through the intervening years, as if she were looking 
at a fire.  'It would be a long story, I am sure.'

'But told as a short one,' suggested the stranger.

Told as a short one,' repeated Clemency in the same thoughtful 
tone, and without any apparent reference to him, or consciousness 
of having auditors, 'what would there be to tell?  That they 
grieved together, and remembered her together, like a person dead; 
that they were so tender of her, never would reproach her, called 
her back to one another as she used to be, and found excuses for 
her!  Every one knows that.  I'm sure I do.  No one better,' added 
Clemency, wiping her eyes with her hand.

'And so,' suggested the stranger.

'And so,' said Clemency, taking him up mechanically, and without 
any change in her attitude or manner, 'they at last were married.  
They were married on her birth-day - it comes round again to-morrow 
- very quiet, very humble like, but very happy.  Mr. Alfred said, 
one night when they were walking in the orchard, "Grace, shall our 
wedding-day be Marion's birth-day?"  And it was.'

'And they have lived happily together?' said the stranger.

'Ay,' said Clemency.  'No two people ever more so.  They have had 
no sorrow but this.'

She raised her head as with a sudden attention to the circumstances 
under which she was recalling these events, and looked quickly at 
the stranger.  Seeing that his face was turned toward the window, 
and that he seemed intent upon the prospect, she made some eager 
signs to her husband, and pointed to the bill, and moved her mouth 
as if she were repeating with great energy, one word or phrase to 
him over and over again.  As she uttered no sound, and as her dumb 
motions like most of her gestures were of a very extraordinary 
kind, this unintelligible conduct reduced Mr. Britain to the 
confines of despair.  He stared at the table, at the stranger, at 
the spoons, at his wife - followed her pantomime with looks of deep 
amazement and perplexity - asked in the same language, was it 
property in danger, was it he in danger, was it she - answered her 
signals with other signals expressive of the deepest distress and 
confusion - followed the motions of her lips - guessed half aloud 
'milk and water,' 'monthly warning,' 'mice and walnuts' - and 
couldn't approach her meaning.

Clemency gave it up at last, as a hopeless attempt; and moving her 
chair by very slow degrees a little nearer to the stranger, sat 
with her eyes apparently cast down but glancing sharply at him now 
and then, waiting until he should ask some other question.  She had 
not to wait long; for he said, presently:

'And what is the after history of the young lady who went away?  
They know it, I suppose?'

Clemency shook her head.  'I've heard,' she said, 'that Doctor 
Jeddler is thought to know more of it than he tells.  Miss Grace 
has had letters from her sister, saying that she was well and 
happy, and made much happier by her being married to Mr. Alfred:  
and has written letters back.  But there's a mystery about her life 
and fortunes, altogether, which nothing has cleared up to this 
hour, and which - '

She faltered here, and stopped.

'And which' - repeated the stranger.

'Which only one other person, I believe, could explain,' said 
Clemency, drawing her breath quickly.

'Who may that be?' asked the stranger.

'Mr. Michael Warden!' answered Clemency, almost in a shriek:  at 
once conveying to her husband what she would have had him 
understand before, and letting Michael Warden know that he was 
recognised.

'You remember me, sir?' said Clemency, trembling with emotion; 'I 
saw just now you did!  You remember me, that night in the garden.  
I was with her!'

'Yes.  You were,' he said.

'Yes, sir,' returned Clemency.  'Yes, to be sure.  This is my 
husband, if you please.  Ben, my dear Ben, run to Miss Grace - run 
to Mr. Alfred - run somewhere, Ben!  Bring somebody here, 
directly!'

'Stay!' said Michael Warden, quietly interposing himself between 
the door and Britain.  'What would you do?'

'Let them know that you are here, sir,' answered Clemency, clapping 
her hands in sheer agitation.  'Let them know that they may hear of 
her, from your own lips; let them know that she is not quite lost 
to them, but that she will come home again yet, to bless her father 
and her loving sister - even her old servant, even me,' she struck 
herself upon the breast with both hands, 'with a sight of her sweet 
face.  Run, Ben, run!'  And still she pressed him on towards the 
door, and still Mr. Warden stood before it, with his hand stretched 
out, not angrily, but sorrowfully.

'Or perhaps,' said Clemency, running past her husband, and catching 
in her emotion at Mr. Warden's cloak, 'perhaps she's here now; 
perhaps she's close by.  I think from your manner she is.  Let me 
see her, sir, if you please.  I waited on her when she was a little 
child.  I saw her grow to be the pride of all this place.  I knew 
her when she was Mr. Alfred's promised wife.  I tried to warn her 
when you tempted her away.  I know what her old home was when she 
was like the soul of it, and how it changed when she was gone and 
lost.  Let me speak to her, if you please!'

He gazed at her with compassion, not unmixed with wonder:  but, he 
made no gesture of assent.

'I don't think she CAN know,' pursued Clemency, 'how truly they 
forgive her; how they love her; what joy it would be to them, to 
see her once more.  She may be timorous of going home.  Perhaps if 
she sees me, it may give her new heart.  Only tell me truly, Mr. 
Warden, is she with you?'

'She is not,' he answered, shaking his head.

This answer, and his manner, and his black dress, and his coming 
back so quietly, and his announced intention of continuing to live 
abroad, explained it all.  Marion was dead.

He didn't contradict her; yes, she was dead!  Clemency sat down, 
hid her face upon the table, and cried.

At that moment, a grey-headed old gentleman came running in:  quite 
out of breath, and panting so much that his voice was scarcely to 
be recognised as the voice of Mr. Snitchey.

'Good Heaven, Mr. Warden!' said the lawyer, taking him aside, 'what 
wind has blown - '  He was so blown himself, that he couldn't get 
on any further until after a pause, when he added, feebly, 'you 
here?'

'An ill-wind, I am afraid,' he answered.  'If you could have heard 
what has just passed - how I have been besought and entreated to 
perform impossibilities - what confusion and affliction I carry 
with me!'

'I can guess it all.  But why did you ever come here, my good sir?' 
retorted Snitchey.

'Come!  How should I know who kept the house?  When I sent my 
servant on to you, I strolled in here because the place was new to 
me; and I had a natural curiosity in everything new and old, in 
these old scenes; and it was outside the town.  I wanted to 
communicate with you, first, before appearing there.  I wanted to 
know what people would say to me.  I see by your manner that you 
can tell me.  If it were not for your confounded caution, I should 
have been possessed of everything long ago.'

'Our caution!' returned the lawyer, 'speaking for Self and Craggs - 
deceased,' here Mr. Snitchey, glancing at his hat-band, shook his 
head, 'how can you reasonably blame us, Mr. Warden?  It was 
understood between us that the subject was never to be renewed, and 
that it wasn't a subject on which grave and sober men like us (I 
made a note of your observations at the time) could interfere.  Our 
caution too!  When Mr. Craggs, sir, went down to his respected 
grave in the full belief - '

'I had given a solemn promise of silence until I should return, 
whenever that might be,' interrupted Mr. Warden; 'and I have kept 
it.'

'Well, sir, and I repeat it,' returned Mr. Snitchey, 'we were bound 
to silence too.  We were bound to silence in our duty towards 
ourselves, and in our duty towards a variety of clients, you among 
them, who were as close as wax.  It was not our place to make 
inquiries of you on such a delicate subject.  I had my suspicions, 
sir; but, it is not six months since I have known the truth, and 
been assured that you lost her.'

'By whom?' inquired his client.

'By Doctor Jeddler himself, sir, who at last reposed that 
confidence in me voluntarily.  He, and only he, has known the whole 
truth, years and years.'

'And you know it?' said his client.

'I do, sir!' replied Snitchey; 'and I have also reason to know that 
it will be broken to her sister to-morrow evening.  They have given 
her that promise.  In the meantime, perhaps you'll give me the 
honour of your company at my house; being unexpected at your own.  
But, not to run the chance of any more such difficulties as you 
have had here, in case you should be recognised - though you're a 
good deal changed; I think I might have passed you myself, Mr. 
Warden - we had better dine here, and walk on in the evening.  It's 
a very good place to dine at, Mr. Warden:  your own property, by-
the-bye.  Self and Craggs (deceased) took a chop here sometimes, 
and had it very comfortably served.  Mr. Craggs, sir,' said 
Snitchey, shutting his eyes tight for an instant, and opening them 
again, 'was struck off the roll of life too soon.'

'Heaven forgive me for not condoling with you,' returned Michael 
Warden, passing his hand across his forehead, 'but I'm like a man 
in a dream at present.  I seem to want my wits.  Mr. Craggs - yes - 
I am very sorry we have lost Mr. Craggs.'  But he looked at 
Clemency as he said it, and seemed to sympathise with Ben, 
consoling her.

'Mr. Craggs, sir,' observed Snitchey, 'didn't find life, I regret 
to say, as easy to have and to hold as his theory made it out, or 
he would have been among us now.  It's a great loss to me.  He was 
my right arm, my right leg, my right ear, my right eye, was Mr. 
Craggs.  I am paralytic without him.  He bequeathed his share of 
the business to Mrs. Craggs, her executors, administrators, and 
assigns.  His name remains in the Firm to this hour.  I try, in a 
childish sort of a way, to make believe, sometimes, he's alive.  
You may observe that I speak for Self and Craggs - deceased, sir - 
deceased,' said the tender-hearted attorney, waving his pocket-
handkerchief.

Michael Warden, who had still been observant of Clemency, turned to 
Mr. Snitchey when he ceased to speak, and whispered in his ear.

'Ah, poor thing!' said Snitchey, shaking his head.  'Yes.  She was 
always very faithful to Marion.  She was always very fond of her.  
Pretty Marion!  Poor Marion!  Cheer up, Mistress - you are married 
now, you know, Clemency.'

Clemency only sighed, and shook her head.

'Well, well!  Wait till to-morrow,' said the lawyer, kindly.

'To-morrow can't bring back' the dead to life, Mister,' said 
Clemency, sobbing.

'No.  It can't do that, or it would bring back Mr. Craggs, 
deceased,' returned the lawyer.  'But it may bring some soothing 
circumstances; it may bring some comfort.  Wait till to-morrow!'

So Clemency, shaking his proffered hand, said she would; and 
Britain, who had been terribly cast down at sight of his despondent 
wife (which was like the business hanging its head), said that was 
right; and Mr. Snitchey and Michael Warden went up-stairs; and 
there they were soon engaged in a conversation so cautiously 
conducted, that no murmur of it was audible above the clatter of 
plates and dishes, the hissing of the frying-pan, the bubbling of 
saucepans, the low monotonous waltzing of the jack - with a 
dreadful click every now and then as if it had met with some mortal 
accident to its head, in a fit of giddiness - and all the other 
preparations in the kitchen for their dinner.


To-morrow was a bright and peaceful day; and nowhere were the 
autumn tints more beautifully seen, than from the quiet orchard of 
the Doctor's house.  The snows of many winter nights had melted 
from that ground, the withered leaves of many summer times had 
rustled there, since she had fled.  The honey-suckle porch was 
green again, the trees cast bountiful and changing shadows on the 
grass, the landscape was as tranquil and serene as it had ever 
been; but where was she!

Not there.  Not there.  She would have been a stranger sight in her 
old home now, even than that home had been at first, without her.  
But, a lady sat in the familiar place, from whose heart she had 
never passed away; in whose true memory she lived, unchanging, 
youthful, radiant with all promise and all hope; in whose affection 
- and it was a mother's now, there was a cherished little daughter 
playing by her side - she had no rival, no successor; upon whose 
gentle lips her name was trembling then.

The spirit of the lost girl looked out of those eyes.  Those eyes 
of Grace, her sister, sitting with her husband in the orchard, on 
their wedding-day, and his and Marion's birth-day.

He had not become a great man; he had not grown rich; he had not 
forgotten the scenes and friends of his youth; he had not fulfilled 
any one of the Doctor's old predictions.  But, in his useful, 
patient, unknown visiting of poor men's homes; and in his watching 
of sick beds; and in his daily knowledge of the gentleness and 
goodness flowering the by-paths of this world, not to be trodden 
down beneath the heavy foot of poverty, but springing up, elastic, 
in its track, and making its way beautiful; he had better learned 
and proved, in each succeeding year, the truth of his old faith.  
The manner of his life, though quiet and remote, had shown him how 
often men still entertained angels, unawares, as in the olden time; 
and how the most unlikely forms - even some that were mean and ugly 
to the view, and poorly clad - became irradiated by the couch of 
sorrow, want, and pain, and changed to ministering spirits with a 
glory round their heads.

He lived to better purpose on the altered battle-ground, perhaps, 
than if he had contended restlessly in more ambitious lists; and he 
was happy with his wife, dear Grace.

And Marion.  Had HE forgotten her?

'The time has flown, dear Grace,' he said, 'since then;' they had 
been talking of that night; 'and yet it seems a long long while 
ago.  We count by changes and events within us.  Not by years.'

'Yet we have years to count by, too, since Marion was with us,' 
returned Grace.  'Six times, dear husband, counting to-night as 
one, we have sat here on her birth-day, and spoken together of that 
happy return, so eagerly expected and so long deferred.  Ah when 
will it be!  When will it be!'

Her husband attentively observed her, as the tears collected in her 
eyes; and drawing nearer, said:

'But, Marion told you, in that farewell letter which she left for 
you upon your table, love, and which you read so often, that years 
must pass away before it COULD be.  Did she not?'

She took a letter from her breast, and kissed it, and said 'Yes.'

'That through these intervening years, however happy she might be, 
she would look forward to the time when you would meet again, and 
all would be made clear; and that she prayed you, trustfully and 
hopefully to do the same.  The letter runs so, does it not, my 
dear?'

'Yes, Alfred.'

'And every other letter she has written since?'

'Except the last - some months ago - in which she spoke of you, and 
what you then knew, and what I was to learn to-night.'

He looked towards the sun, then fast declining, and said that the 
appointed time was sunset.

'Alfred!' said Grace, laying her hand upon his shoulder earnestly, 
'there is something in this letter - this old letter, which you say 
I read so often - that I have never told you.  But, to-night, dear 
husband, with that sunset drawing near, and all our life seeming to 
soften and become hushed with the departing day, I cannot keep it 
secret.'

'What is it, love?'

'When Marion went away, she wrote me, here, that you had once left 
her a sacred trust to me, and that now she left you, Alfred, such a 
trust in my hands:  praying and beseeching me, as I loved her, and 
as I loved you, not to reject the affection she believed (she knew, 
she said) you would transfer to me when the new wound was healed, 
but to encourage and return it.'

' - And make me a proud, and happy man again, Grace.  Did she say 
so?'

'She meant, to make myself so blest and honoured in your love,' was 
his wife's answer, as he held her in his arms.

'Hear me, my dear!' he said. - 'No.  Hear me so!' - and as he 
spoke, he gently laid the head she had raised, again upon his 
shoulder.  'I know why I have never heard this passage in the 
letter, until now.  I know why no trace of it ever showed itself in 
any word or look of yours at that time.  I know why Grace, although 
so true a friend to me, was hard to win to be my wife.  And knowing 
it, my own! I know the priceless value of the heart I gird within 
my arms, and thank GOD for the rich possession!'

She wept, but not for sorrow, as he pressed her to his heart.  
After a brief space, he looked down at the child, who was sitting 
at their feet playing with a little basket of flowers, and bade her 
look how golden and how red the sun was.

'Alfred,' said Grace, raising her head quickly at these words.  
'The sun is going down.  You have not forgotten what I am to know 
before it sets.'

'You are to know the truth of Marion's history, my love,' he 
answered.

'All the truth,' she said, imploringly.  'Nothing veiled from me, 
any more.  That was the promise.  Was it not?'

'It was,' he answered.

'Before the sun went down on Marion's birth-day.  And you see it, 
Alfred?  It is sinking fast.'

He put his arm about her waist, and, looking steadily into her 
eyes, rejoined:

'That truth is not reserved so long for me to tell, dear Grace.  It 
is to come from other lips.'

'From other lips!' she faintly echoed.

'Yes.  I know your constant heart, I know how brave you are, I know 
that to you a word of preparation is enough.  You have said, truly, 
that the time is come.  It is.  Tell me that you have present 
fortitude to bear a trial - a surprise - a shock:  and the 
messenger is waiting at the gate.'

'What messenger?' she said.  'And what intelligence does he bring?'

'I am pledged,' he answered her, preserving his steady look, 'to 
say no more.  Do you think you understand me?'

'I am afraid to think,' she said.

There was that emotion in his face, despite its steady gaze, which 
frightened her.  Again she hid her own face on his shoulder, 
trembling, and entreated him to pause - a moment.

'Courage, my wife!  When you have firmness to receive the 
messenger, the messenger is waiting at the gate.  The sun is 
setting on Marion's birth-day.  Courage, courage, Grace!'

She raised her head, and, looking at him, told him she was ready.  
As she stood, and looked upon him going away, her face was so like 
Marion's as it had been in her later days at home, that it was 
wonderful to see.  He took the child with him.  She called her back 
- she bore the lost girl's name - and pressed her to her bosom.  
The little creature, being released again, sped after him, and 
Grace was left alone.

She knew not what she dreaded, or what hoped; but remained there, 
motionless, looking at the porch by which they had disappeared.

Ah! what was that, emerging from its shadow; standing on its 
threshold!  That figure, with its white garments rustling in the 
evening air; its head laid down upon her father's breast, and 
pressed against it to his loving heart!  O God! was it a vision 
that came bursting from the old man's arms, and with a cry, and 
with a waving of its hands, and with a wild precipitation of itself 
upon her in its boundless love, sank down in her embrace!

'Oh, Marion, Marion!  Oh, my sister!  Oh, my heart's dear love!  
Oh, joy and happiness unutterable, so to meet again!'

It was no dream, no phantom conjured up by hope and fear, but 
Marion, sweet Marion!  So beautiful, so happy, so unalloyed by care 
and trial, so elevated and exalted in her loveliness, that as the 
setting sun shone brightly on her upturned face, she might have 
been a spirit visiting the earth upon some healing mission.

Clinging to her sister, who had dropped upon a seat and bent down 
over her - and smiling through her tears - and kneeling, close 
before her, with both arms twining round her, and never turning for 
an instant from her face - and with the glory of the setting sun 
upon her brow, and with the soft tranquillity of evening gathering 
around them - Marion at length broke silence; her voice, so calm, 
low, clear, and pleasant, well-tuned to the time.

'When this was my dear home, Grace, as it will be now again - '

'Stay, my sweet love!  A moment!  O Marion, to hear you speak 
again.'

She could not bear the voice she loved so well, at first.

'When this was my dear home, Grace, as it will be now again, I 
loved him from my soul.  I loved him most devotedly.  I would have 
died for him, though I was so young.  I never slighted his 
affection in my secret breast for one brief instant.  It was far 
beyond all price to me.  Although it is so long ago, and past, and 
gone, and everything is wholly changed, I could not bear to think 
that you, who love so well, should think I did not truly love him 
once.  I never loved him better, Grace, than when he left this very 
scene upon this very day.  I never loved him better, dear one, than 
I did that night when I left here.'

Her sister, bending over her, could look into her face, and hold 
her fast.

'But he had gained, unconsciously,' said Marion, with a gentle 
smile, 'another heart, before I knew that I had one to give him.  
That heart - yours, my sister! - was so yielded up, in all its 
other tenderness, to me; was so devoted, and so noble; that it 
plucked its love away, and kept its secret from all eyes but mine - 
Ah! what other eyes were quickened by such tenderness and 
gratitude! - and was content to sacrifice itself to me.  But, I 
knew something of its depths.  I knew the struggle it had made.  I 
knew its high, inestimable worth to him, and his appreciation of 
it, let him love me as he would.  I knew the debt I owed it.  I had 
its great example every day before me.  What you had done for me, I 
knew that I could do, Grace, if I would, for you.  I never laid my 
head down on my pillow, but I prayed with tears to do it.  I never 
laid my head down on my pillow, but I thought of Alfred's own words 
on the day of his departure, and how truly he had said (for I knew 
that, knowing you) that there were victories gained every day, in 
struggling hearts, to which these fields of battle were nothing.  
Thinking more and more upon the great endurance cheerfully 
sustained, and never known or cared for, that there must be, every 
day and hour, in that great strife of which he spoke, my trial 
seemed to grow light and easy.  And He who knows our hearts, my 
dearest, at this moment, and who knows there is no drop of 
bitterness or grief - of anything but unmixed happiness - in mine, 
enabled me to make the resolution that I never would be Alfred's 
wife.  That he should be my brother, and your husband, if the 
course I took could bring that happy end to pass; but that I never 
would (Grace, I then loved him dearly, dearly!) be his wife!'

'O Marion!  O Marion!'

'I had tried to seem indifferent to him;' and she pressed her 
sister's face against her own; 'but that was hard, and you were 
always his true advocate.  I had tried to tell you of my 
resolution, but you would never hear me; you would never understand 
me.  The time was drawing near for his return.  I felt that I must 
act, before the daily intercourse between us was renewed.  I knew 
that one great pang, undergone at that time, would save a 
lengthened agony to all of us.  I knew that if I went away then, 
that end must follow which HAS followed, and which has made us both 
so happy, Grace!  I wrote to good Aunt Martha, for a refuge in her 
house:  I did not then tell her all, but something of my story, and 
she freely promised it.  While I was contesting that step with 
myself, and with my love of you, and home, Mr. Warden, brought here 
by an accident, became, for some time, our companion.'

'I have sometimes feared of late years, that this might have been,' 
exclaimed her sister; and her countenance was ashy-pale.  'You 
never loved him - and you married him in your self-sacrifice to 
me!'

'He was then,' said Marion, drawing her sister closer to her, 'on 
the eve of going secretly away for a long time.  He wrote to me, 
after leaving here; told me what his condition and prospects really 
were; and offered me his hand.  He told me he had seen I was not 
happy in the prospect of Alfred's return.  I believe he thought my 
heart had no part in that contract; perhaps thought I might have 
loved him once, and did not then; perhaps thought that when I tried 
to seem indifferent, I tried to hide indifference - I cannot tell.  
But I wished that you should feel me wholly lost to Alfred - 
hopeless to him - dead.  Do you understand me, love?'

Her sister looked into her face, attentively.  She seemed in doubt.

'I saw Mr. Warden, and confided in his honour; charged him with my 
secret, on the eve of his and my departure.  He kept it.  Do you 
understand me, dear?'

Grace looked confusedly upon her.  She scarcely seemed to hear.

'My love, my sister!' said Marion, 'recall your thoughts a moment; 
listen to me.  Do not look so strangely on me.  There are 
countries, dearest, where those who would abjure a misplaced 
passion, or would strive, against some cherished feeling of their 
hearts and conquer it, retire into a hopeless solitude, and close 
the world against themselves and worldly loves and hopes for ever.  
When women do so, they assume that name which is so dear to you and 
me, and call each other Sisters.  But, there may be sisters, Grace, 
who, in the broad world out of doors, and underneath its free sky, 
and in its crowded places, and among its busy life, and trying to 
assist and cheer it and to do some good, - learn the same lesson; 
and who, with hearts still fresh and young, and open to all 
happiness and means of happiness, can say the battle is long past, 
the victory long won.  And such a one am I!  You understand me 
now?'

Still she looked fixedly upon her, and made no reply.

'Oh Grace, dear Grace,' said Marion, clinging yet more tenderly and 
fondly to that breast from which she had been so long exiled, 'if 
you were not a happy wife and mother - if I had no little namesake 
here - if Alfred, my kind brother, were not your own fond husband - 
from whence could I derive the ecstasy I feel to-night!  But, as I 
left here, so I have returned.  My heart has known no other love, 
my hand has never been bestowed apart from it.  I am still your 
maiden sister, unmarried, unbetrothed:  your own loving old Marion, 
in whose affection you exist alone and have no partner, Grace!'

She understood her now.  Her face relaxed:  sobs came to her 
relief; and falling on her neck, she wept and wept, and fondled her 
as if she were a child again.

When they were more composed, they found that the Doctor, and his 
sister good Aunt Martha, were standing near at hand, with Alfred.

'This is a weary day for me,' said good Aunt Martha, smiling 
through her tears, as she embraced her nieces; 'for I lose my dear 
companion in making you all happy; and what can you give me, in 
return for my Marion?'

'A converted brother,' said the Doctor.

'That's something, to be sure,' retorted Aunt Martha, 'in such a 
farce as - '

'No, pray don't,' said the doctor penitently.

'Well, I won't,' replied Aunt Martha.  'But, I consider myself ill 
used.  I don't know what's to become of me without my Marion, after 
we have lived together half-a-dozen years.'

'You must come and live here, I suppose,' replied the Doctor.  'We 
shan't quarrel now, Martha.'

'Or you must get married, Aunt,' said Alfred.

'Indeed,' returned the old lady, 'I think it might be a good 
speculation if I were to set my cap at Michael Warden, who, I hear, 
is come home much the better for his absence in all respects.  But 
as I knew him when he was a boy, and I was not a very young woman 
then, perhaps he mightn't respond.  So I'll make up my mind to go 
and live with Marion, when she marries, and until then (it will not 
be very long, I dare say) to live alone.  What do YOU say, 
Brother?'

'I've a great mind to say it's a ridiculous world altogether, and 
there's nothing serious in it,' observed the poor old Doctor.

'You might take twenty affidavits of it if you chose, Anthony,' 
said his sister; 'but nobody would believe you with such eyes as 
those.'

'It's a world full of hearts,' said the Doctor, hugging his 
youngest daughter, and bending across her to hug Grace - for he 
couldn't separate the sisters; 'and a serious world, with all its 
folly - even with mine, which was enough to have swamped the whole 
globe; and it is a world on which the sun never rises, but it looks 
upon a thousand bloodless battles that are some set-off against the 
miseries and wickedness of Battle-Fields; and it is a world we need 
be careful how we libel, Heaven forgive us, for it is a world of 
sacred mysteries, and its Creator only knows what lies beneath the 
surface of His lightest image!'


You would not be the better pleased with my rude pen, if it 
dissected and laid open to your view the transports of this family, 
long severed and now reunited.  Therefore, I will not follow the 
poor Doctor through his humbled recollection of the sorrow he had 
had, when Marion was lost to him; nor, will I tell how serious he 
had found that world to be, in which some love, deep-anchored, is 
the portion of all human creatures; nor, how such a trifle as the 
absence of one little unit in the great absurd account, had 
stricken him to the ground.  Nor, how, in compassion for his 
distress, his sister had, long ago, revealed the truth to him by 
slow degrees, and brought him to the knowledge of the heart of his 
self-banished daughter, and to that daughter's side.

Nor, how Alfred Heathfield had been told the truth, too, in the 
course of that then current year; and Marion had seen him, and had 
promised him, as her brother, that on her birth-day, in the 
evening, Grace should know it from her lips at last.

'I beg your pardon, Doctor,' said Mr. Snitchey, looking into the 
orchard, 'but have I liberty to come in?'

Without waiting for permission, he came straight to Marion, and 
kissed her hand, quite joyfully.

'If Mr. Craggs had been alive, my dear Miss Marion,' said Mr. 
Snitchey, 'he would have had great interest in this occasion.  It 
might have suggested to him, Mr. Alfred, that our life is not too 
easy perhaps:  that, taken altogether, it will bear any little 
smoothing we can give it; but Mr. Craggs was a man who could endure 
to be convinced, sir.  He was always open to conviction.  If he 
were open to conviction, now, I - this is weakness.  Mrs. Snitchey, 
my dear,' - at his summons that lady appeared from behind the door, 
'you are among old friends.'

Mrs. Snitchey having delivered her congratulations, took her 
husband aside.

'One moment, Mr. Snitchey,' said that lady.  'It is not in my 
nature to rake up the ashes of the departed.'

'No, my dear,' returned her husband.

'Mr. Craggs is - '

'Yes, my dear, he is deceased,' said Snitchey.

'But I ask you if you recollect,' pursued his wife, 'that evening 
of the ball?  I only ask you that.  If you do; and if your memory 
has not entirely failed you, Mr. Snitchey; and if you are not 
absolutely in your dotage; I ask you to connect this time with that 
- to remember how I begged and prayed you, on my knees - '

'Upon your knees, my dear?' said Mr. Snitchey.

'Yes,' said Mrs. Snitchey, confidently, 'and you know it - to 
beware of that man - to observe his eye - and now to tell me 
whether I was right, and whether at that moment he knew secrets 
which he didn't choose to tell.'

'Mrs. Snitchey,' returned her husband, in her ear, 'Madam.  Did you 
ever observe anything in MY eye?'

'No,' said Mrs. Snitchey, sharply.  'Don't flatter yourself.'

'Because, Madam, that night,' he continued, twitching her by the 
sleeve, 'it happens that we both knew secrets which we didn't 
choose to tell, and both knew just the same professionally.  And so 
the less you say about such things the better, Mrs. Snitchey; and 
take this as a warning to have wiser and more charitable eyes 
another time.  Miss Marion, I brought a friend of yours along with 
me.  Here!  Mistress!'

Poor Clemency, with her apron to her eyes, came slowly in, escorted 
by her husband; the latter doleful with the presentiment, that if 
she abandoned herself to grief, the Nutmeg-Grater was done for.

'Now, Mistress,' said the lawyer, checking Marion as she ran 
towards her, and interposing himself between them, 'what's the 
matter with YOU?'

'The matter!' cried poor Clemency. - When, looking up in wonder, 
and in indignant remonstrance, and in the added emotion of a great 
roar from Mr. Britain, and seeing that sweet face so well 
remembered close before her, she stared, sobbed, laughed, cried, 
screamed, embraced her, held her fast, released her, fell on Mr. 
Snitchey and embraced him (much to Mrs. Snitchey's indignation), 
fell on the Doctor and embraced him, fell on Mr. Britain and 
embraced him, and concluded by embracing herself, throwing her 
apron over her head, and going into hysterics behind it.

A stranger had come into the orchard, after Mr. Snitchey, and had 
remained apart, near the gate, without being observed by any of the 
group; for they had little spare attention to bestow, and that had 
been monopolised by the ecstasies of Clemency.  He did not appear 
to wish to be observed, but stood alone, with downcast eyes; and 
there was an air of dejection about him (though he was a gentleman 
of a gallant appearance) which the general happiness rendered more 
remarkable.

None but the quick eyes of Aunt Martha, however, remarked him at 
all; but, almost as soon as she espied him, she was in conversation 
with him.  Presently, going to where Marion stood with Grace and 
her little namesake, she whispered something in Marion's ear, at 
which she started, and appeared surprised; but soon recovering from 
her confusion, she timidly approached the stranger, in Aunt 
Martha's company, and engaged in conversation with him too.

'Mr. Britain,' said the lawyer, putting his hand in his pocket, and 
bringing out a legal-looking document, while this was going on, 'I 
congratulate you.  You are now the whole and sole proprietor of 
that freehold tenement, at present occupied and held by yourself as 
a licensed tavern, or house of public entertainment, and commonly 
called or known by the sign of the Nutmeg-Grater.  Your wife lost 
one house, through my client Mr. Michael Warden; and now gains 
another.  I shall have the pleasure of canvassing you for the 
county, one of these fine mornings.'

'Would it make any difference in the vote if the sign was altered, 
sir?' asked Britain.

'Not in the least,' replied the lawyer.

'Then,' said Mr. Britain, handing him back the conveyance, 'just 
clap in the words, "and Thimble," will you be so good; and I'll 
have the two mottoes painted up in the parlour instead of my wife's 
portrait.'

'And let me,' said a voice behind them; it was the stranger's - 
Michael Warden's; 'let me claim the benefit of those inscriptions.  
Mr. Heathfield and Dr. Jeddler, I might have deeply wronged you 
both.  That I did not, is no virtue of my own.  I will not say that 
I am six years wiser than I was, or better.  But I have known, at 
any rate, that term of self-reproach.  I can urge no reason why you 
should deal gently with me.  I abused the hospitality of this 
house; and learnt by my own demerits, with a shame I never have 
forgotten, yet with some profit too, I would fain hope, from one,' 
he glanced at Marion, 'to whom I made my humble supplication for 
forgiveness, when I knew her merit and my deep unworthiness.  In a 
few days I shall quit this place for ever.  I entreat your pardon.  
Do as you would be done by!  Forget and Forgive!'


TIME - from whom I had the latter portion of this story, and with 
whom I have the pleasure of a personal acquaintance of some five-
and-thirty years' duration - informed me, leaning easily upon his 
scythe, that Michael Warden never went away again, and never sold 
his house, but opened it afresh, maintained a golden means of 
hospitality, and had a wife, the pride and honour of that 
countryside, whose name was Marion.  But, as I have observed that 
Time confuses facts occasionally, I hardly know what weight to give 
to his authority.




End of the Project Gutenberg Etext of The Battle of Life by Charles Dickens

*The Project Gutenberg Etext of Bleak House by Charles Dickens*
#33 in our series by Charles Dickens


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


Bleak House

by Charles Dickens

August, 1997  [Etext #1023]


*The Project Gutenberg Etext of Bleak House by Charles Dickens*
******This file should be named blkhs10.txt or blkhs10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, blkhs11.txt.
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, blkhs10a.txt.


This etext was prepared by Donald Lainson, Toronto, Canada
(charlie@idirect.com)


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, for time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-two text
files per month, or 384 more Etexts in 1997 for a total of 1000+
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach over 100 billion Etexts given away.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by the December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000=Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only 10% of the present number of computer users.  2001
should have at least twice as many computer users as that, so it
will require us reaching less than 5% of the users in 2001.


We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-
Mellon University).

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

We would prefer to send you this information by email
(Internet, Bitnet, Compuserve, ATTMAIL or MCImail).

******
If you have an FTP program (or emulator), please
FTP directly to the Project Gutenberg archives:
[Mac users, do NOT point and click. . .type]

ftp uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu
login:  anonymous
password:  your@login
cd etext/etext90 through /etext96
or cd etext/articles [get suggest gut for more information]
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET INDEX?00.GUT
for a list of books
and
GET NEW GUT for general information
and
MGET GUT* for newsletters.

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Carnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





This etext was prepared by Donald Lainson, Toronto, Canada
(charlie@idirect.com)





BLEAK HOUSE

by Charles Dickens




PREFACE


A Chancery judge once had the kindness to inform me, as one of a 
company of some hundred and fifty men and women not labouring under 
any suspicions of lunacy, that the Court of Chancery, though the 
shining subject of much popular prejudice (at which point I thought 
the judge's eye had a cast in my direction), was almost immaculate.  
There had been, he admitted, a trivial blemish or so in its rate of 
progress, but this was exaggerated and had been entirely owing to 
the "parsimony of the public," which guilty public, it appeared, 
had been until lately bent in the most determined manner on by no 
means enlarging the number of Chancery judges appointed--I believe 
by Richard the Second, but any other king will do as well.

This seemed to me too profound a joke to be inserted in the body of 
this book or I should have restored it to Conversation Kenge or to 
Mr. Vholes, with one or other of whom I think it must have 
originated.  In such mouths I might have coupled it with an apt 
quotation from one of Shakespeare's sonnets:

"My nature is subdued
To what it works in, like the dyer's hand:
Pity me, then, and wish I were renewed!"

But as it is wholesome that the parsimonious public should know 
what has been doing, and still is doing, in this connexion, I 
mention here that everything set forth in these pages concerning 
the Court of Chancery is substantially true, and within the truth.  
The case of Gridley is in no essential altered from one of actual 
occurrence, made public by a disinterested person who was 
professionally acquainted with the whole of the monstrous wrong 
from beginning to end.  At the present moment (August, 1853) there 
is a suit before the court which was commenced nearly twenty years 
ago, in which from thirty to forty counsel have been known to 
appear at one time, in which costs have been incurred to the amount 
of seventy thousand pounds, which is A FRIENDLY SUIT, and which is 
(I am assured) no nearer to its termination now than when it was 
begun.  There is another well-known suit in Chancery, not yet 
decided, which was commenced before the close of the last century 
and in which more than double the amount of seventy thousand pounds 
has been swallowed up in costs.  If I wanted other authorities for 
Jarndyce and Jarndyce, I could rain them on these pages, to the 
shame of--a parsimonious public.

There is only one other point on which I offer a word of remark.  
The possibility of what is called spontaneous combustion has been 
denied since the death of Mr. Krook; and my good friend Mr. Lewes 
(quite mistaken, as he soon found, in supposing the thing to have 
been abandoned by all authorities) published some ingenious letters 
to me at the time when that event was chronicled, arguing that 
spontaneous combustion could not possibly be.  I have no need to 
observe that I do not wilfully or negligently mislead my readers 
and that before I wrote that description I took pains to 
investigate the subject.  There are about thirty cases on record, 
of which the most famous, that of the Countess Cornelia de Baudi 
Cesenate, was minutely investigated and described by Giuseppe 
Bianchini, a prebendary of Verona, otherwise distinguished in 
letters, who published an account of it at Verona in 1731, which he 
afterwards republished at Rome.  The appearances, beyond all 
rational doubt, observed in that case are the appearances observed 
in Mr. Krook's case.  The next most famous instance happened at 
Rheims six years earlier, and the historian in that case is Le Cat, 
one of the most renowned surgeons produced by France.  The subject 
was a woman, whose husband was ignorantly convicted of having 
murdered her; but on solemn appeal to a higher court, he was 
acquitted because it was shown upon the evidence that she had died 
the death of which this name of spontaneous combustion is given.  I 
do not think it necessary to add to these notable facts, and that 
general reference to the authorities which will be found at page 
30, vol. ii.,* the recorded opinions and experiences of 
distinguished medical professors, French, English, and Scotch, in 
more modern days, contenting myself with observing that I shall not 
abandon the facts until there shall have been a considerable 
spontaneous combustion of the testimony on which human occurrences 
are usually received.

In Bleak House I have purposely dwelt upon the romantic side of 
familiar things.


1853


* Another case, very clearly described by a dentist, occurred at 
the town of Columbus, in the United States of America, quite 
recently.  The subject was a German who kept a liquor-shop aud was 
an inveterate drunkard.



CHAPTER I

In Chancery


London.  Michaelmas term lately over, and the Lord Chancellor 
sitting in Lincoln's Inn Hall.  Implacable November weather.  As 
much mud in the streets as if the waters had but newly retired from 
the face of the earth, and it would not be wonderful to meet a 
Megalosaurus, forty feet long or so, waddling like an elephantine 
lizard up Holborn Hill.  Smoke lowering down from chimney-pots, 
making a soft black drizzle, with flakes of soot in it as big as 
full-grown snowflakes--gone into mourning, one might imagine, for 
the death of the sun.  Dogs, undistinguishable in mire.  Horses, 
scarcely better; splashed to their very blinkers.  Foot passengers, 
jostling one another's umbrellas in a general infection of ill 
temper, and losing their foot-hold at street-corners, where tens of 
thousands of other foot passengers have been slipping and sliding 
since the day broke (if this day ever broke), adding new deposits 
to the crust upon crust of mud, sticking at those points 
tenaciously to the pavement, and accumulating at compound interest.

Fog everywhere.  Fog up the river, where it flows among green aits 
and meadows; fog down the river, where it rolls deified among the 
tiers of shipping and the waterside pollutions of a great (and 
dirty) city.  Fog on the Essex marshes, fog on the Kentish heights.  
Fog creeping into the cabooses of collier-brigs; fog lying out on 
the yards and hovering in the rigging of great ships; fog drooping 
on the gunwales of barges and small boats.  Fog in the eyes and 
throats of ancient Greenwich pensioners, wheezing by the firesides 
of their wards; fog in the stem and bowl of the afternoon pipe of 
the wrathful skipper, down in his close cabin; fog cruelly pinching 
the toes and fingers of his shivering little 'prentice boy on deck.  
Chance people on the bridges peeping over the parapets into a 
nether sky of fog, with fog all round them, as if they were up in a 
balloon and hanging in the misty clouds.

Gas looming through the fog in divers places in the streets, much 
as the sun may, from the spongey fields, be seen to loom by 
husbandman and ploughboy.  Most of the shops lighted two hours 
before their time--as the gas seems to know, for it has a haggard 
and unwilling look.

The raw afternoon is rawest, and the dense fog is densest, and the 
muddy streets are muddiest near that leaden-headed old obstruction, 
appropriate ornament for the threshold of a leaden-headed old 
corporation, Temple Bar.  And hard by Temple Bar, in Lincoln's Inn 
Hall, at the very heart of the fog, sits the Lord High Chancellor 
in his High Court of Chancery.

Never can there come fog too thick, never can there come mud and 
mire too deep, to assort with the groping and floundering condition 
which this High Court of Chancery, most pestilent of hoary sinners, 
holds this day in the sight of heaven and earth.

On such an afternoon, if ever, the Lord High Chancellor ought to be 
sitting her--as here he is--with a foggy glory round his head, 
softly fenced in with crimson cloth and curtains, addressed by a 
large advocate with great whiskers, a little voice, and an 
interminable brief, and outwardly directing his contemplation to 
the lantern in the roof, where he can see nothing but fog.  On such 
an afternoon some score of members of the High Court of Chancery 
bar ought to be--as here they are--mistily engaged in one of the 
ten thousand stages of an endless cause, tripping one another up on 
slippery precedents, groping knee-deep in technicalities, running 
their goat-hair and horsehair warded heads against walls of words 
and making a pretence of equity with serious faces, as players 
might.  On such an afternoon the various solicitors in the cause, 
some two or three of whom have inherited it from their fathers, who 
made a fortune by it, ought to be--as are they not?--ranged in a 
line, in a long matted well (but you might look in vain for truth 
at the bottom of it) between the registrar's red table and the silk 
gowns, with bills, cross-bills, answers, rejoinders, injunctions, 
affidavits, issues, references to masters, masters' reports, 
mountains of costly nonsense, piled before them.  Well may the 
court be dim, with wasting candles here and there; well may the fog 
hang heavy in it, as if it would never get out; well may the 
stained-glass windows lose their colour and admit no light of day 
into the place; well may the uninitiated from the streets, who peep 
in through the glass panes in the door, be deterred from entrance 
by its owlish aspect and by the drawl, languidly echoing to the 
roof from the padded dais where the Lord High Chancellor looks into 
the lantern that has no light in it and where the attendant wigs 
are all stuck in a fog-bank!  This is the Court of Chancery, which 
has its decaying houses and its blighted lands in every shire, 
which has its worn-out lunatic in every madhouse and its dead in 
every churchyard, which has its ruined suitor with his slipshod 
heels and threadbare dress borrowing and begging through the round 
of every man's acquaintance, which gives to monied might the means 
abundantly of wearying out the right, which so exhausts finances, 
patience, courage, hope, so overthrows the brain and breaks the 
heart, that there is not an honourable man among its practitioners 
who would not give--who does not often give--the warning, "Suffer 
any wrong that can be done you rather than come here!"

Who happen to be in the Lord Chancellor's court this murky 
afternoon besides the Lord Chancellor, the counsel in the cause, 
two or three counsel who are never in any cause, and the well of 
solicitors before mentioned?  There is the registrar below the 
judge, in wig and gown; and there are two or three maces, or petty-
bags, or privy purses, or whatever they may be, in legal court 
suits.  These are all yawning, for no crumb of amusement ever falls 
from Jarndyce and Jarndyce (the cause in hand), which was squeezed 
dry years upon years ago.  The short-hand writers, the reporters of 
the court, and the reporters of the newspapers invariably decamp 
with the rest of the regulars when Jarndyce and Jarndyce comes on.  
Their places are a blank.  Standing on a seat at the side of the 
hall, the better to peer into the curtained sanctuary, is a little 
mad old woman in a squeezed bonnet who is always in court, from its 
sitting to its rising, and always expecting some incomprehensible 
judgment to be given in her favour.  Some say she really is, or 
was, a party to a suit, but no one knows for certain because no one 
cares.  She carries some small litter in a reticule which she calls 
her documents, principally consisting of paper matches and dry 
lavender.  A sallow prisoner has come up, in custody, for the half-
dozenth time to make a personal application "to purge himself of 
his contempt," which, being a solitary surviving executor who has 
fallen into a state of conglomeration about accounts of which it is 
not pretended that he had ever any knowledge, he is not at all 
likely ever to do.  In the meantime his prospects in life are 
ended.  Another ruined suitor, who periodically appears from 
Shropshire and breaks out into efforts to address the Chancellor at 
the close of the day's business and who can by no means be made to 
understand that the Chancellor is legally ignorant of his existence 
after making it desolate for a quarter of a century, plants himself 
in a good place and keeps an eye on the judge, ready to call out 
"My Lord!" in a voice of sonorous complaint on the instant of his 
rising.  A few lawyers' clerks and others who know this suitor by 
sight linger on the chance of his furnishing some fun and 
enlivening the dismal weather a little.

Jarndyce and Jarndyce drones on.  This scarecrow of a suit has, in 
course of time, become so complicated that no man alive knows what 
it means.  The parties to it understand it least, but it has been 
observed that no two Chancery lawyers can talk about it for five 
minutes without coming to a total disagreement as to all the 
premises.  Innumerable children have been born into the cause; 
innumerable young people have married into it; innumerable old 
people have died out of it.  Scores of persons have deliriously 
found themselves made parties in Jarndyce and Jarndyce without 
knowing how or why; whole families have inherited legendary hatreds 
with the suit.  The little plaintiff or defendant who was promised 
a new rocking-horse when Jarndyce and Jarndyce should be settled 
has grown up, possessed himself of a real horse, and trotted away 
into the other world.  Fair wards of court have faded into mothers 
and grandmothers; a long procession of Chancellors has come in and 
gone out; the legion of bills in the suit have been transformed 
into mere bills of mortality; there are not three Jarndyces left 
upon the earth perhaps since old Tom Jarndyce in despair blew his 
brains out at a coffee-house in Chancery Lane; but Jarndyce and 
Jarndyce still drags its dreary length before the court, 
perennially hopeless.

Jarndyce and Jarndyce has passed into a joke.  That is the only 
good that has ever come of it.  It has been death to many, but it 
is a joke in the profession.  Every master in Chancery has had a 
reference out of it.  Every Chancellor was "in it," for somebody or 
other, when he was counsel at the bar.  Good things have been said 
about it by blue-nosed, bulbous-shoed old benchers in select port-
wine committee after dinner in hall.  Articled clerks have been in 
the habit of fleshing their legal wit upon it.  The last Lord 
Chancellor handled it neatly, when, correcting Mr. Blowers, the 
eminent silk gown who said that such a thing might happen when the 
sky rained potatoes, he observed, "or when we get through Jarndyce 
and Jarndyce, Mr. Blowers"--a pleasantry that particularly tickled 
the maces, bags, and purses.

How many people out of the suit Jarndyce and Jarndyce has stretched 
forth its unwholesome hand to spoil and corrupt would be a very 
wide question.  From the master upon whose impaling files reams of 
dusty warrants in Jarndyce and Jarndyce have grimly writhed into 
many shapes, down to the copying-clerk in the Six Clerks' Office 
who has copied his tens of thousands of Chancery folio-pages under 
that eternal heading, no man's nature has been made better by it.  
In trickery, evasion, procrastination, spoliation, botheration, 
under false pretences of all sorts, there are influences that can 
never come to good.  The very solicitors' boys who have kept the 
wretched suitors at bay, by protesting time out of mind that Mr. 
Chizzle, Mizzle, or otherwise was particularly engaged and had 
appointments until dinner, may have got an extra moral twist and 
shuffle into themselves out of Jarndyce and Jarndyce.  The receiver 
in the cause has acquired a goodly sum of money by it but has 
acquired too a distrust of his own mother and a contempt for his 
own kind.  Chizzle, Mizzle, and otherwise have lapsed into a habit 
of vaguely promising themselves that they will look into that 
outstanding little matter and see what can be done for Drizzle--who 
was not well used--when Jarndyce and Jarndyce shall be got out of 
the office.  Shirking and sharking in all their many varieties have 
been sown broadcast by the ill-fated cause; and even those who have 
contemplated its history from the outermost circle of such evil 
have been insensibly tempted into a loose way of letting bad things 
alone to take their own bad course, and a loose belief that if the 
world go wrong it was in some off-hand manner never meant to go 
right.

Thus, in the midst of the mud and at the heart of the fog, sits the 
Lord High Chancellor in his High Court of Chancery.

"Mr. Tangle," says the Lord High Chancellor, latterly something 
restless under the eloquence of that learned gentleman.

"Mlud," says Mr. Tangle.  Mr. Tangle knows more of Jarndyce and 
Jarndyce than anybody.  He is famous for it--supposed never to have 
read anything else since he left school.

"Have you nearly concluded your argument?"

"Mlud, no--variety of points--feel it my duty tsubmit--ludship," is 
the reply that slides out of Mr. Tangle.

"Several members of the bar are still to be heard, I believe?" says 
the Chancellor with a slight smile.

Eighteen of Mr. Tangle's learned friends, each armed with a little 
summary of eighteen hundred sheets, bob up like eighteen hammers in 
a pianoforte, make eighteen bows, and drop into their eighteen 
places of obscurity.

"We will proceed with the hearing on Wednesday fortnight," says the 
Chancellor.  For the question at issue is only a question of costs, 
a mere bud on the forest tree of the parent suit, and really will 
come to a settlement one of these days.

The Chancellor rises; the bar rises; the prisoner is brought 
forward in a hurry; the man from Shropshire cries, "My lord!"  
Maces, bags, and purses indignantly proclaim silence and frown at 
the man from Shropshire.

"In reference," proceeds the Chancellor, still on Jarndyce and 
Jarndyce, "to the young girl--" 

"Begludship's pardon--boy," says Mr. Tangle prematurely.  "In 
reference," proceeds the Chancellor with extra distinctness, "to 
the young girl and boy, the two young people"--Mr. Tangle crushed--
"whom I directed to be in attendance to-day and who are now in my 
private room, I will see them and satisfy myself as to the 
expediency of making the order for their residing with their 
uncle."

Mr. Tangle on his legs again.  "Begludship's pardon--dead."

"With their"--Chancellor looking through his double eyeglass at the 
papers on his desk--"grandfather."

"Begludship's pardon--victim of rash action--brains."

Suddenly a very little counsel with a terrific bass voice arises, 
fully inflated, in the back settlements of the fog, and says, "Will 
your lordship allow me?  I appear for him.  He is a cousin, several 
times removed.  I am not at the moment prepared to inform the court 
in what exact remove he is a cousin, but he IS a cousin.

Leaving this address (delivered like a sepulchral message) ringing 
in the rafters of the roof, the very little counsel drops, and the 
fog knows him no more.  Everybody looks for him.  Nobody can see 
him.

"I will speak with both the young people," says the Chancellor 
anew, "and satisfy myself on the subject of their residing with 
their cousin.  I will mention the matter to-morrow morning when I 
take my seat."

The Chancellor is about to bow to the bar when the prisoner is 
presented.  Nothing can possibly come of the prisoner's 
conglomeration but his being sent back to prison, which is soon 
done.  The man from Shropshire ventures another remonstrative "My 
lord!" but the Chancellor, being aware of him, has dexterously 
vanished.  Everybody else quickly vanishes too.  A battery of blue 
bags is loaded with heavy charges of papers and carried off by 
clerks; the little mad old woman marches off with her documents; 
the empty court is locked up.  If all the injustice it has 
committed and all the misery it has caused could only be locked up 
with it, and the whole burnt away in a great funeral pyre--why so 
much the better for other parties than the parties in Jarndyce and 
Jarndyce!



CHAPTER II

In Fashion


It is but a glimpse of the world of fashion that we want on this 
same miry afternoon.  It is not so unlike the Court of Chancery but 
that we may pass from the one scene to the other, as the crow 
flies.  Both the world of fashion and the Court of Chancery are 
things of precedent and usage: oversleeping Rip Van Winkles who 
have played at strange games through a deal of thundery weather; 
sleeping beauties whom the knight will wake one day, when all the 
stopped spits in the kitchen shall begin to turn prodigiously!

It is not a large world.  Relatively even to this world of ours, 
which has its limits too (as your Highness shall find when you have 
made the tour of it and are come to the brink of the void beyond), 
it is a very little speck.  There is much good in it; there are 
many good and true people in it; it has its appointed place.  But 
the evil of it is that it is a world wrapped up in too much 
jeweller's cotton and fine wool, and cannot hear the rushing of the 
larger worlds, and cannot see them as they circle round the sun.  
It is a deadened world, and its growth is sometimes unhealthy for 
want of air.

My Lady Dedlock has returned to her house in town for a few days 
previous to her departure for Paris, where her ladyship intends to 
stay some weeks, after which her movements are uncertain.  The 
fashionable intelligence says so for the comfort of the Parisians, 
and it knows all fashionable things.  To know things otherwise were 
to be unfashionable.  My Lady Dedlock has been down at what she 
calls, in familiar conversation, her "place" in Lincolnshire.  The 
waters are out in Lincolnshire.  An arch of the bridge in the park 
has been sapped and sopped away.  The adjacent low-lying ground for 
half a mile in breadth is a stagnant river with melancholy trees 
for islands in it and a surface punctured all over, all day long, 
with falling rain.  My Lady Dedlock's place has been extremely 
dreary.  The weather for many a day and night has been so wet that 
the trees seem wet through, and the soft loppings and prunings of 
the woodman's axe can make no crash or crackle as they fall.  The 
deer, looking soaked, leave quagmires where they pass.  The shot of 
a rifle loses its sharpness in the moist air, and its smoke moves 
in a tardy little cloud towards the green rise, coppice-topped, 
that makes a background for the falling rain.  The view from my 
Lady Dedlock's own windows is alternately a lead-coloured view and 
a view in Indian ink.  The vases on the stone terrace in the 
foreground catch the rain all day; and the heavy drops fall--drip, 
drip, drip--upon the broad flagged pavement, called from old time 
the Ghost's Walk, all night.  On Sundays the little church in the 
park is mouldy; the oaken pulpit breaks out into a cold sweat; and 
there is a general smell and taste as of the ancient Dedlocks in 
their graves.  My Lady Dedlock (who is childless), looking out in 
the early twilight from her boudoir at a keeper's lodge and seeing 
the light of a fire upon the latticed panes, and smoke rising from 
the chimney, and a child, chased by a woman, running out into the 
rain to meet the shining figure of a wrapped-up man coming through 
the gate, has been put quite out of temper.  My Lady Dedlock says 
she has been "bored to death."

Therefore my Lady Dedlock has come away from the place in 
Lincolnshire and has left it to the rain, and the crows, and the 
rabbits, and the deer, and the partridges and pheasants.  The 
pictures of the Dedlocks past and gone have seemed to vanish into 
the damp walls in mere lowness of spirits, as the housekeeper has 
passed along the old rooms shutting up the shutters.  And when they 
will next come forth again, the fashionable intelligence--which, 
like the fiend, is omniscient of the past and present, but not the 
future--cannot yet undertake to say.

Sir Leicester Dedlock is only a baronet, but there is no mightier 
baronet than he.  His family is as old as the hills, and infinitely 
more respectable.  He has a general opinion that the world might 
get on without hills but would be done up without Dedlocks.  He 
would on the whole admit nature to be a good idea (a little low, 
perhaps, when not enclosed with a park-fence), but an idea 
dependent for its execution on your great county families.  He is a 
gentleman of strict conscience, disdainful of all littleness and 
meanness and ready on the shortest notice to die any death you may 
please to mention rather than give occasion for the least 
impeachment of his integrity.  He is an honourable, obstinate, 
truthful, high-spirited, intensely prejudiced, perfectly 
unreasonable man.

Sir Leicester is twenty years, full measure, older than my Lady.  
He will never see sixty-five again, nor perhaps sixty-six, nor yet 
sixty-seven.  He has a twist of the gout now and then and walks a 
little stiffly.  He is of a worthy presence, with his light-grey 
hair and whiskers, his fine shirt-frill, his pure-white waistcoat, 
and his blue coat with bright buttons always buttoned.  He is 
ceremonious, stately, most polite on every occasion to my Lady, and 
holds her personal attractions in the highest estimation.  His 
gallantry to my Lady, which has never changed since he courted her, 
is the one little touch of romantic fancy in him.

Indeed, he married her for love.  A whisper still goes about that 
she had not even family; howbeit, Sir Leicester had so much family 
that perhaps he had enough and could dispense with any more.  But 
she had beauty, pride, ambition, insolent resolve, and sense enough 
to portion out a legion of fine ladies.  Wealth and station, added 
to these, soon floated her upward, and for years now my Lady 
Dedlock has been at the centre of the fashionable intelligence and 
at the top of the fashionable tree.

How Alexander wept when he had no more worlds to conquer, everybody 
knows--or has some reason to know by this time, the matter having 
been rather frequently mentioned.  My Lady Dedlock, having 
conquered HER world, fell not into the melting, but rather into the 
freezing, mood.  An exhausted composure, a worn-out placidity, an 
equanimity of fatigue not to be ruffled by interest or satisfaction, 
are the trophies of her victory.  She is perfectly well-bred.  
If she could be translated to heaven to-morrow, she might be 
expected to ascend without any rapture.

She has beauty still, and if it be not in its heyday, it is not yet 
in its autumn.  She has a fine face--originally of a character that 
would be rather called very pretty than handsome, but improved into 
classicality by the acquired expression of her fashionable state.  
Her figure is elegant and has the effect of being tall.  Not that 
she is so, but that "the most is made," as the Honourable Bob 
Stables has frequently asserted upon oath, "of all her points."  
The same authority observes that she is perfectly got up and 
remarks in commendation of her hair especially that she is the 
best-groomed woman in the whole stud.

With all her perfections on her head, my Lady Dedlock has come up 
from her place in Lincolnshire (hotly pursued by the fashionable 
intelligence) to pass a few days at her house in town previous to 
her departure for Paris, where her ladyship intends to stay some 
weeks, after which her movements are uncertain.  And at her house 
in town, upon this muddy, murky afternoon, presents himself an old-
fashioned old gentleman, attorney-at-law and eke solicitor of the 
High Court of Chancery, who has the honour of acting as legal 
adviser of the Dedlocks and has as many cast-iron boxes in his 
office with that name outside as if the present baronet were the 
coin of the conjuror's trick and were constantly being juggled 
through the whole set.  Across the hall, and up the stairs, and 
along the passages, and through the rooms, which are very brilliant 
in the season and very dismal out of it--fairy-land to visit, but a 
desert to live in--the old gentleman is conducted by a Mercury in 
powder to my Lady's presence.

The old gentleman is rusty to look at, but is reputed to have made 
good thrift out of aristocratic marriage settlements and 
aristocratic wills, and to be very rich.  He is surrounded by a 
mysterious halo of family confidences, of which he is known to be 
the silent depository.  There are noble mausoleums rooted for 
centuries in retired glades of parks among the growing timber and 
the fern, which perhaps hold fewer noble secrets than walk abroad 
among men, shut up in the breast of Mr. Tulkinghorn.  He is of what 
is called the old school--a phrase generally meaning any school 
that seems never to have been young--and wears knee-breeches tied 
with ribbons, and gaiters or stockings.  One peculiarity of his 
black clothes and of his black stockings, be they silk or worsted, 
is that they never shine.  Mute, close, irresponsive to any 
glancing light, his dress is like himself.  He never converses when 
not professionaly consulted.  He is found sometimes, speechless but 
quite at home, at corners of dinner-tables in great country houses 
and near doors of drawing-rooms, concerning which the fashionable 
intelligence is eloquent, where everybody knows him and where half 
the Peerage stops to say "How do you do, Mr. Tulkinghorn?"  He 
receives these salutations with gravity and buries them along with 
the rest of his knowledge.

Sir Leicester Dedlock is with my Lady and is happy to see Mr. 
Tulkinghorn.  There is an air of prescription about him which is 
always agreeable to Sir Leicester; he receives it as a kind of 
tribute.  He likes Mr. Tulkinghorn's dress; there is a kind of 
tribute in that too.  It is eminently respectable, and likewise, in 
a general way, retainer-like.  It expresses, as it were, the 
steward of the legal mysteries, the butler of the legal cellar, of 
the Dedlocks.

Has Mr. Tulkinghorn any idea of this himself?  It may be so, or it 
may not, but there is this remarkable circumstance to be noted in 
everything associated with my Lady Dedlock as one of a class--as 
one of the leaders and representatives of her little world.  She 
supposes herself to be an inscrutable Being, quite out of the reach 
and ken of ordinary mortals--seeing herself in her glass, where 
indeed she looks so.  Yet every dim little star revolving about 
her, from her maid to the manager of the Italian Opera, knows her 
weaknesses, prejudices, follies, haughtinesses, and caprices and 
lives upon as accurate a calculation and as nice a measure of her 
moral nature as her dressmaker takes of her physical proportions.  
Is a new dress, a new custom, a new singer, a new dancer, a new 
form of jewellery, a new dwarf or giant, a new chapel, a new 
anything, to be set up?  There are deferential people in a dozen 
callings whom my Lady Dedlock suspects of nothing but prostration 
before her, who can tell you how to manage her as if she were a 
baby, who do nothing but nurse her all their lives, who, humbly 
affecting to follow with profound subservience, lead her and her 
whole troop after them; who, in hooking one, hook all and bear them 
off as Lemuel Gulliver bore away the stately fleet of the majestic 
Lilliput.  "If you want to address our people, sir," say Blaze and 
Sparkle, the jewellers--meaning by our people Lady Dedlock and the 
rest--"you must remember that you are not dealing with the general 
public; you must hit our people in their weakest place, and their 
weakest place is such a place."  "To make this article go down, 
gentlemen," say Sheen and Gloss, the mercers, to their friends the 
manufacturers, "you must come to us, because we know where to have 
the fashionable people, and we can make it fashionable."  "If you 
want to get this print upon the tables of my high connexion, sir," 
says Mr. Sladdery, the librarian, "or if you want to get this dwarf 
or giant into the houses of my high connexion, sir, or if you want 
to secure to this entertainment the patronage of my high connexion, 
sir, you must leave it, if you please, to me, for I have been 
accustomed to study the leaders of my high connexion, sir, and I 
may tell you without vanity that I can turn them round my finger"--
in which Mr. Sladdery, who is an honest man, does not exaggerate at 
all.

Therefore, while Mr. Tulkinghorn may not know what is passing in 
the Dedlock mind at present, it is very possible that he may.

"My Lady's cause has been again before the Chancellor, has it, Mr. 
Tulkinghorn?" says Sir Leicester, giving him his hand.

"Yes.  It has been on again to-day," Mr. Tulkinghorn replies, 
making one of his quiet bows to my Lady, who is on a sofa near the 
fire, shading her face with a hand-screen.

"It would be useless to ask," says my Lady with the dreariness of 
the place in Lincolnshire still upon her, "whether anything has 
been done."

"Nothing that YOU would call anything has been done to-day," 
replies Mr. Tulkinghorn.

"Nor ever will be," says my Lady.

Sir Leicester has no objection to an interminable Chancery suit.  
It is a slow, expensive, British, constitutional kind of thing.  To 
be sure, he has not a vital interest in the suit in question, her 
part in which was the only property my Lady brought him; and he has 
a shadowy impression that for his name--the name of Dedlock--to be 
in a cause, and not in the title of that cause, is a most 
ridiculous accident.  But he regards the Court of Chancery, even if 
it should involve an occasional delay of justice and a trifling 
amount of confusion, as a something devised in conjunction with a 
variety of other somethings by the perfection of human wisdom for 
the eternal settlement (humanly speaking) of everything.  And he is 
upon the whole of a fixed opinion that to give the sanction of his 
countenance to any complaints respecting it would be to encourage 
some person in the lower classes to rise up somewhere--like Wat 
Tyler.

"As a few fresh affidavits have been put upon the file," says Mr. 
Tulkinghorn, "and as they are short, and as I proceed upon the 
troublesome principle of begging leave to possess my clients with 
any new proceedings in a cause"--cautious man Mr. Tulkinghorn, 
taking no more responsibility than necessary--"and further, as I 
see you are going to Paris, I have brought them in my pocket."

(Sir Leicester was going to Paris too, by the by, but the delight 
of the fashionable intelligence was in his Lady.)

Mr. Tulkinghorn takes out his papers, asks permission to place them 
on a golden talisman of a table at my Lady's elbow, puts on his 
spectacles, and begins to read by the light of a shaded lamp.

"'In Chancery.  Between John Jarndyce--'"

My Lady interrupts, requesting him to miss as many of the formal 
horrors as he can.

Mr. Tulkinghorn glances over his spectacles and begins again lower 
down.  My Lady carelessly and scornfully abstracts her attention.  
Sir Leicester in a great chair looks at the file and appears to 
have a stately liking for the legal repetitions and prolixities as 
ranging among the national bulwarks.  It happens that the fire is 
hot where my Lady sits and that the hand-screen is more beautiful 
than useful, being priceless but small.  My Lady, changing her 
position, sees the papers on the table--looks at them nearer--looks 
at them nearer still--asks impulsively, "Who copied that?"

Mr. Tulkinghorn stops short, surprised by my Lady's animation and 
her unusual tone.

"Is it what you people call law-hand?" she asks, looking full at 
him in her careless way again and toying with her screen.

"Not quite.  Probably"--Mr. Tulkinghorn examines it as he speaks--
"the legal character which it has was acquired after the original 
hand was formed.  Why do you ask?"

"Anything to vary this detestable monotony.  Oh, go on, do!"

Mr. Tulkinghorn reads again.  The heat is greater; my Lady screens 
her face.  Sir Leicester dozes, starts up suddenly, and cries, "Eh?  
What do you say?"

"I say I am afraid," says Mr. Tulkinghorn, who had risen hastily, 
"that Lady Dedlock is ill."

"Faint," my Lady murmurs with white lips, "only that; but it is 
like the faintness of death.  Don't speak to me.  Ring, and take me 
to my room!"

Mr. Tulkinghorn retires into another chamber; bells ring, feet 
shuffle and patter, silence ensues.  Mercury at last begs Mr. 
Tulkinghorn to return.

"Better now," quoth Sir Leicester, motioning the lawyer to sit down 
and read to him alone.  "I have been quite alarmed.  I never knew 
my Lady swoon before.  But the weather is extremely trying, and she 
really has been bored to death down at our place in Lincolnshire."



CHAPTER III

A Progress


I have a great deal of difficulty in beginning to write my portion 
of these pages, for I know I am not clever.  I always knew that.  I 
can remember, when I was a very little girl indeed, I used to say 
to my doll when we were alone together, "Now, Dolly, I am not 
clever, you know very well, and you must be patient with me, like a 
dear!"  And so she used to sit propped up in a great arm-chair, 
with her beautiful complexion and rosy lips, staring at me--or not 
so much at me, I think, as at nothing--while I busily stitched away 
and told her every one of my secrets.

My dear old doll!  I was such a shy little thing that I seldom 
dared to open my lips, and never dared to open my heart, to anybody 
else.  It almost makes me cry to think what a relief it used to be 
to me when I came home from school of a day to run upstairs to my 
room and say, "Oh, you dear faithful Dolly, I knew you would be 
expecting me!" and then to sit down on the floor, leaning on the 
elbow of her great chair, and tell her all I had noticed since we 
parted.  I had always rather a noticing way--not a quick way, oh, 
no!--a silent way of noticing what passed before me and thinking I 
should like to understand it better.  I have not by any means a 
quick understanding.  When I love a person very tenderly indeed, it 
seems to brighten.  But even that may be my vanity.

I was brought up, from my earliest remembrance--like some of the 
princesses in the fairy stories, only I was not charming--by my 
godmother.  At least, I only knew her as such.  She was a good, 
good woman!  She went to church three times every Sunday, and to 
morning prayers on Wednesdays and Fridays, and to lectures whenever 
there were lectures; and never missed.  She was handsome; and if 
she had ever smiled, would have been (I used to think) like an 
angel--but she never smiled.  She was always grave and strict.  She 
was so very good herself, I thought, that the badness of other 
people made her frown all her life.  I felt so different from her, 
even making every allowance for the differences between a child and 
a woman; I felt so poor, so trifling, and so far off that I never 
could be unrestrained with her--no, could never even love her as I 
wished.  It made me very sorry to consider how good she was and how 
unworthy of her I was, and I used ardently to hope that I might 
have a better heart; and I talked it over very often with the dear 
old doll, but I never loved my godmother as I ought to have loved 
her and as I felt I must have loved her if I had been a better 
girl.

This made me, I dare say, more timid and retiring than I naturally 
was and cast me upon Dolly as the only friend with whom I felt at 
ease.  But something happened when I was still quite a little thing 
that helped it very much.

I had never heard my mama spoken of.  I had never heard of my papa 
either, but I felt more interested about my mama.  I had never worn 
a black frock, that I could recollect.  I had never been shown my 
mama's grave.  I had never been told where it was.  Yet I had never 
been taught to pray for any relation but my godmother.  I had more 
than once approached this subject of my thoughts with Mrs. Rachael, 
our only servant, who took my light away when I was in bed (another 
very good woman, but austere to me), and she had only said, 
"Esther, good night!" and gone away and left me.

Although there were seven girls at the neighbouring school where I 
was a day boarder, and although they called me little Esther 
Summerson, I knew none of them at home.  All of them were older 
than I, to be sure (I was the youngest there by a good deal), but 
there seemed to be some other separation between us besides that, 
and besides their being far more clever than I was and knowing much 
more than I did.  One of them in the first week of my going to the 
school (I remember it very well) invited me home to a little party, 
to my great joy.  But my godmother wrote a stiff letter declining 
for me, and I never went.  I never went out at all.

It was my birthday.  There were holidays at school on other 
birthdays--none on mine.  There were rejoicings at home on other 
birthdays, as I knew from what I heard the girls relate to one 
another--there were none on mine.  My birthday was the most 
melancholy day at home in the whole year.

I have mentioned that unless my vanity should deceive me (as I know 
it may, for I may be very vain without suspecting it, though indeed 
I don't), my comprehension is quickened when my affection is.  My 
disposition is very affectionate, and perhaps I might still feel 
such a wound if such a wound could be received more than once with 
the quickness of that birthday.

Dinner was over, and my godmother and I were sitting at the table 
before the fire.  The clock ticked, the fire clicked; not another 
sound had been heard in the room or in the house for I don't know 
how long.  I happened to look timidly up from my stitching, across 
the table at my godmother, and I saw in her face, looking gloomily 
at me, "It would have been far better, little Esther, that you had 
had no birthday, that you had never been born!"

I broke out crying and sobbing, and I said, "Oh, dear godmother, 
tell me, pray do tell me, did Mama die on my birthday?"

"No," she returned.  "Ask me no more, child!"

"Oh, do pray tell me something of her.  Do now, at last, dear 
godmother, if you please!  What did I do to her?  How did I lose 
her?  Why am I so different from other children, and why is it my 
fault, dear godmother?  No, no, no, don't go away.  Oh, speak to 
me!"

I was in a kind of fright beyond my grief, and I caught hold of her 
dress and was kneeling to her.  She had been saying all the while, 
"Let me go!"  But now she stood still.

Her darkened face had such power over me that it stopped me in the 
midst of my vehemence.  I put up my trembling little hand to clasp 
hers or to beg her pardon with what earnestness I might, but 
withdrew it as she looked at me, and laid it on my fluttering 
heart.  She raised me, sat in her chair, and standing me before 
her, said slowly in a cold, low voice--I see her knitted brow and 
pointed finger--"Your mother, Esther, is your disgrace, and you 
were hers.  The time will come--and soon enough--when you will 
understand this better and will feel it too, as no one save a woman 
can.  I have forgiven her"--but her face did not relent--"the wrong 
she did to me, and I say no more of it, though it was greater than 
you will ever know--than any one will ever know but I, the 
sufferer.  For yourself, unfortunate girl, orphaned and degraded 
from the first of these evil anniversaries, pray daily that the 
sins of others be not visited upon your head, according to what is 
written.  Forget your mother and leave all other people to forget 
her who will do her unhappy child that greatest kindness.  Now, 
go!"

She checked me, however, as I was about to depart from her--so 
frozen as I was!--and added this, "Submission, self-denial, 
diligent work, are the preparations for a life begun with such a 
shadow on it.  You are different from other children, Esther, 
because you were not born, like them, in common sinfulness and 
wrath.  You are set apart."

I went up to my room, and crept to bed, and laid my doll's cheek 
against mine wet with tears, and holding that solitary friend upon 
my bosom, cried myself to sleep.  Imperfect as my understanding of 
my sorrow was, I knew that I had brought no joy at any time to 
anybody's heart and that I was to no one upon earth what Dolly was 
to me.

Dear, dear, to think how much time we passed alone together 
afterwards, and how often I repeated to the doll the story of my 
birthday and confided to her that I would try as hard as ever I 
could to repair the fault I had been born with (of which I 
confessedly felt guilty and yet innocent) and would strive as I 
grew up to be industrious, contented, and kind-hearted and to do 
some good to some one, and win some love to myself if I could.  I 
hope it is not self-indulgent to shed these tears as I think of it.  
I am very thankful, I am very cheerful, but I cannot quite help 
their coming to my eyes.

There! I have wiped them away now and can go on again properly.

I felt the distance between my godmother and myself so much more 
after the birthday, and felt so sensible of filling a place in her 
house which ought to have been empty, that I found her more 
difficult of approach, though I was fervently grateful to her in my 
heart, than ever.  I felt in the same way towards my school 
companions; I felt in the same way towards Mrs. Rachael, who was a 
widow; and oh, towards her daughter, of whom she was proud, who 
came to see her once a fortnight!  I was very retired and quiet, 
and tried to be very diligent.

One sunny afternoon when I had come home from school with my books 
and portfolio, watching my long shadow at my side, and as I was 
gliding upstairs to my room as usual, my godmother looked out of 
the parlour-door and called me back.  Sitting with her, I found--
which was very unusual indeed--a stranger.  A portly, important-
looking gentleman, dressed all in black, with a white cravat, large 
gold watch seals, a pair of gold eye-glasses, and a large seal-ring 
upon his little finger.

"This," said my godmother in an undertone, "is the child."  Then 
she said in her naturally stern way of speaking, "This is Esther, 
sir."

The gentleman put up his eye-glasses to look at me and said, "Come 
here, my dear!"  He shook hands with me and asked me to take off my 
bonnet, looking at me all the while.  When I had complied, he said, 
"Ah!" and afterwards "Yes!"  And then, taking off his eye-glasses 
and folding them in a red case, and leaning back in his arm-chair, 
turning the case about in his two hands, he gave my godmother a 
nod.  Upon that, my godmother said, "You may go upstairs, Esther!"  
And I made him my curtsy and left him.

It must have been two years afterwards, and I was almost fourteen, 
when one dreadful night my godmother and I sat at the fireside.  I 
was reading aloud, and she was listening.  I had come down at nine 
o'clock as I always did to read the Bible to her, and was reading 
from St. John how our Saviour stooped down, writing with his finger 
in the dust, when they brought the sinful woman to him.

"'So when they continued asking him, he lifted up himself and said 
unto them, He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a 
stone at her!'"

I was stopped by my godmother's rising, putting her hand to her 
head, and crying out in an awful voice from quite another part of 
the book, "'Watch ye, therefore, lest coming suddenly he find you 
sleeping.  And what I say unto you, I say unto all, Watch!'"

In an instant, while she stood before me repeating these words, she 
fell down on the floor.  I had no need to cry out; her voice had 
sounded through the house and been heard in the street.

She was laid upon her bed.  For more than a week she lay there, 
little altered outwardly, with her old handsome resolute frown that 
I so well knew carved upon her face.  Many and many a time, in the 
day and in the night, with my head upon the pillow by her that my 
whispers might be plainer to her, I kissed her, thanked her, prayed 
for her, asked her for her blessing and forgiveness, entreated her 
to give me the least sign that she knew or heard me.  No, no, no.  
Her face was immovable.  To the very last, and even afterwards, her 
frown remained unsoftened.

On the day after my poor good godmother was buried, the gentleman 
in black with the white neckcloth reappeared.  I was sent for by 
Mrs. Rachael, and found him in the same place, as if he had never 
gone away.

"My name is Kenge," he said; "you may remember it, my child; Kenge 
and Carboy, Lincoln's Inn."

I replied that I remembered to have seen him once before.

"Pray be seated--here near me.  Don't distress yourself; it's of no 
use.  Mrs. Rachael, I needn't inform you who were acquainted with 
the late Miss Barbary's affairs, that her means die with her and 
that this young lady, now her aunt is dead--"

"My aunt, sir!"

"It is really of no use carrying on a deception when no object is 
to be gained by it," said Mr. Kenge smoothly, "Aunt in fact, though 
not in law.  Don't distress yourself!  Don't weep!  Don't tremble!  
Mrs. Rachael, our young friend has no doubt heard of--the--a--
Jarndyce and Jarndyce."

"Never," said Mrs. Rachael.

"Is it possible," pursued Mr. Kenge, putting up his eye-glasses, 
"that our young friend--I BEG you won't distress yourself!--never 
heard of Jarndyce and Jarndyce!"

I shook my head, wondering even what it was.

"Not of Jarndyce and Jarndyce?" said Mr. Kenge, looking over his 
glasses at me and softly turning the case about and about as if he 
were petting something.  "Not of one of the greatest Chancery suits 
known?  Not of Jarndyce and Jarndyce--the--a--in itself a monument 
of Chancery practice.  In which (I would say) every difficulty, 
every contingency, every masterly fiction, every form of procedure 
known in that court, is represented over and over again?  It is a 
cause that could not exist out of this free and great country.  I 
should say that the aggregate of costs in Jarndyce and Jarndyce, 
Mrs. Rachael"--I was afraid he addressed himself to her because I 
appeared inattentive"--amounts at the present hour to from SIX-ty 
to SEVEN-ty THOUSAND POUNDS!" said Mr. Kenge, leaning back in his 
chair.

I felt very ignorant, but what could I do?  I was so entirely 
unacquainted with the subject that I understood nothing about it 
even then.

"And she really never heard of the cause!" said Mr. Kenge.  
"Surprising!"

"Miss Barbary, sir," returned Mrs. Rachael, "who is now among the 
Seraphim--"

"I hope so, I am sure," said Mr. Kenge politely.

"--Wished Esther only to know what would be serviceable to her.  
And she knows, from any teaching she has had here, nothing more."

"Well!" said Mr. Kenge.  "Upon the whole, very proper.  Now to the 
point," addressing me.  "Miss Barbary, your sole relation (in fact 
that is, for I am bound to observe that in law you had none) being 
deceased and it naturally not being to be expected that Mrs. 
Rachael--"

"Oh, dear no!" said Mrs. Rachael quickly.

"Quite so," assented Mr. Kenge; "--that Mrs. Rachael should charge 
herself with your maintenance and support (I beg you won't distress 
yourself), you are in a position to receive the renewal of an offer 
which I was instructed to make to Miss Barbary some two years ago 
and which, though rejected then, was understood to be renewable 
under the lamentable circumstances that have since occurred.  Now, 
if I avow that I represent, in Jarndyce and Jarndyce and otherwise, 
a highly humane, but at the same time singular, man, shall I 
compromise myself by any stretch of my professional caution?" said 
Mr. Kenge, leaning back in his chair again and looking calmly at us 
both.

He appeared to enjoy beyond everything the sound of his own voice.  
I couldn't wonder at that, for it was mellow and full and gave 
great importance to every word he uttered.  He listened to himself 
with obvious satisfaction and sometimes gently beat time to his own 
music with his head or rounded a sentence with his hand.  I was 
very much impressed by him--even then, before I knew that he formed 
himself on the model of a great lord who was his client and that he 
was generally called Conversation Kenge.

"Mr. Jarndyce," he pursued, "being aware of the--I would say, 
desolate--position of our young friend, offers to place her at a 
first-rate establishment where her education shall be completed, 
where her comfort shall be secured, where her reasonable wants 
shall be anticipated, where she shall be eminently qualified to 
discharge her duty in that station of life unto which it has 
pleased--shall I say Providence?--to call her."

My heart was filled so full, both by what he said and by his 
affecting manner of saying it, that I was not able to speak, though 
I tried.

"Mr. Jarndyce," he went on, "makes no condition beyond expressing 
his expectation that our young friend will not at any time remove 
herself from the establishment in question without his knowledge 
and concurrence.  That she will faithfully apply herself to the 
acquisition of those accomplishments, upon the exercise of which 
she will be ultimately dependent.  That she will tread in the paths 
of virtue and honour, and--the--a--so forth."

I was still less able to speak than before.

"Now, what does our young friend say?" proceeded Mr, Kenge.  "Take 
time, take time!  I pause for her reply.  But take time!"

What the destitute subject of such an offer tried to say, I need 
not repeat.  What she did say, I could more easily tell, if it were 
worth the telling.  What she felt, and will feel to her dying hour, 
I could never relate.

This interview took place at Windsor, where I had passed (as far as 
I knew) my whole life.  On that day week, amply provided with all 
necessaries, I left it, inside the stagecoach, for Reading.

Mrs. Rachael was too good to feel any emotion at parting, but I was 
not so good, and wept bitterly.  I thought that I ought to have 
known her better after so many years and ought to have made myself 
enough of a favourite with her to make her sorry then.  When she 
gave me one cold parting kiss upon my forehead, like a thaw-drop 
from the stone porch--it was a very frosty day--I felt so miserable 
and self-reproachful that I clung to her and told her it was my 
fault, I knew, that she could say good-bye so easily!

"No, Esther!" she returned.  "It is your misfortune!"

The coach was at the little lawn-gate--we had not come out until we 
heard the wheels--and thus I left her, with a sorrowful heart.  She 
went in before my boxes were lifted to the coach-roof and shut the 
door.  As long as I could see the house, I looked back at it from 
the window through my tears.  My godmother had left Mrs. Rachael 
all the little property she possessed; and there was to be a sale; 
and an old hearth-rug with roses on it, which always seemed to me 
the first thing in the world I had ever seen, was hanging outside 
in the frost and snow.  A day or two before, I had wrapped the dear 
old doll in her own shawl and quietly laid her--I am half ashamed 
to tell it--in the garden-earth under the tree that shaded my old 
window.  I had no companion left but my bird, and him I carried 
with me in his cage.

When the house was out of sight, I sat, with my bird-cage in the 
straw at my feet, forward on the low seat to look out of the high 
window, watching the frosty trees, that were like beautiful pieces 
of spar, and the fields all smooth and white with last night's 
snow, and the sun, so red but yielding so little heat, and the ice, 
dark like metal where the skaters and sliders had brushed the snow 
away.  There was a gentleman in the coach who sat on the opposite 
seat and looked very large in a quantity of wrappings, but he sat 
gazing out of the other window and took no notice of me.

I thought of my dead godmother, of the night when I read to her, of 
her frowning so fixedly and sternly in her bed, of the strange 
place I was going to, of the people I should find there, and what 
they would be like, and what they would say to me, when a voice in 
the coach gave me a terrible start.

It said, "What the de-vil are you crying for?"

I was so frightened that I lost my voice and could only answer in a 
whisper, "Me, sir?"  For of course I knew it must have been the 
gentleman in the quantity of wrappings, though he was still looking 
out of his window.

"Yes, you," he said, turning round.

"I didn't know I was crying, sir," I faltered.

"But you are!" said the gentleman.  "Look here!"  He came quite 
opposite to me from the other corner of the coach, brushed one of 
his large furry cuffs across my eyes (but without hurting me), and 
showed me that it was wet.

"There!  Now you know you are," he said.  "Don't you?"

"Yes, sir," I said.

"And what are you crying for?" said the genfleman, "Don't you want 
to go there?"

"Where, sir?"

"Where?  Why, wherever you are going," said the gentleman.

"I am very glad to go there, sir," I answered.

"Well, then!  Look glad!" said the gentleman.

I thought he was very strange, or at least that what I could see of 
him was very strange, for he was wrapped up to the chin, and his 
face was almost hidden in a fur cap with broad fur straps at the 
side of his head fastened under his chin; but I was composed again, 
and not afraid of him.  So I told him that I thought I must have 
been crying because of my godmother's death and because of Mrs. 
Rachael's not being sorry to part with me.

"Confound Mrs. Rachael!" said the gentleman.  "Let her fly away in 
a high wind on a broomstick!"

I began to be really afraid of him now and looked at him with the 
greatest astonishment.  But I thought that he had pleasant eyes, 
although he kept on muttering to himself in an angry manner and 
calling Mrs. Rachael names.

After a little while he opened his outer wrapper, which appeared to 
me large enough to wrap up the whole coach, and put his arm down 
into a deep pocket in the side.

"Now, look here!" he said.  "In this paper," which was nicely 
folded, "is a piece of the best plum-cake that can be got for 
money--sugar on the outside an inch thick, like fat on mutton 
chops.  Here's a little pie (a gem this is, both for size and 
quality), made in France.  And what do you suppose it's made of?  
Livers of fat geese.  There's a pie!  Now let's see you eat 'em."

"Thank you, sir," I replied; "thank you very much indeed, but I 
hope you won't be offended--they are too rich for me."

"Floored again!" said the gentleman, which I didn't at all 
understand, and threw them both out of window.

He did not speak to me any more until he got out of the coach a 
little way short of Reading, when he advised me to be a good girl 
and to be studious, and shook hands with me.  I must say I was 
relieved by his departure.  We left him at a milestone.  I often 
walked past it afterwards, and never for a long time without 
thinking of him and half expecting to meet him.  But I never did; 
and so, as time went on, he passed out of my mind.

When the coach stopped, a very neat lady looked up at the window 
and said, "Miss Donny."

"No, ma'am, Esther Summerson."

"That is quite right," said the lady, "Miss Donny."

I now understood that she introduced herself by that name, and 
begged Miss Donny's pardon for my mistake, and pointed out my boxes 
at her request.  Under the direction of a very neat maid, they were 
put outside a very small green carriage; and then Miss Donny, the 
maid, and I got inside and were driven away.

"Everything is ready for you, Esther," said Miss Donny, "and the 
scheme of your pursuits has been arranged in exact accordance with 
the wishes of your guardian, Mr. Jarndyce."

"Of--did you say, ma'am?"

"Of your guardian, Mr. Jarndyce," said Miss Donny.

I was so bewildered that Miss Donny thought the cold had been too 
severe for me and lent me her smelling-bottle.

"Do you know my--guardian, Mr. Jarndyce, ma'am?" I asked after a 
good deal of hesitation.

"Not personally, Esther," said Miss Donny; "merely through his 
solicitors, Messrs. Kenge and Carboy, of London.  A very superior 
gentleman, Mr. Kenge.  Truly eloquent indeed.  Some of his periods 
quite majestic!"

I felt this to be very true but was too confused to attend to it.  
Our speedy arrival at our destination, before I had time to recover 
myself, increased my confusion, and I never shall forget the 
uncertain and the unreal air of everything at Greenleaf (Miss 
Donny's house) that afternoon!

But I soon became used to it.  I was so adapted to the routine of 
Greenleaf before long that I seemed to have been there a great 
while and almost to have dreamed rather than really lived my old 
life at my godmother's.  Nothing could be more precise, exact, and 
orderly than Greenleaf.  There was a time for everything all round 
the dial of the clock, and everything was done at its appointed 
moment.

We were twelve boarders, and there were two Miss Donnys, twins.  It 
was understood that I would have to depend, by and by, on my 
qualifications as a governess, and I was not only instructed in 
everything that was taught at Greenleaf, but was very soon engaged 
in helping to instruct others.  Although I was treated in every 
other respect like the rest of the school, this single difference 
was made in my case from the first.  As I began to know more, I 
taught more, and so in course of time I had plenty to do, which I 
was very fond of doing because it made the dear girls fond of me.  
At last, whenever a new pupil came who was a little downcast and 
unhappy, she was so sure--indeed I don't know why--to make a friend 
of me that all new-comers were confided to my care.  They said I 
was so gentle, but I am sure THEY were!  I often thought of the 
resolution I had made on my birthday to try to be industrious, 
contented, and true-hearted and to do some good to some one and win 
some love if I could; and indeed, indeed, I felt almost ashamed to 
have done so little and have won so much.

I passed at Greenleaf six happy, quiet years.  I never saw in any 
face there, thank heaven, on my birthday, that it would have been 
better if I had never been born.  When the day came round, it 
brought me so many tokens of affectionate remembrance that my room 
was beautiful with them from New Year's Day to Christmas.

In those six years I had never been away except on visits at 
holiday time in the neighbourhood.  After the first six months or 
so I had taken Miss Donny's advice in reference to the propriety of 
writing to Mr. Kenge to say that I was happy and grateful, and with 
her approval I had written such a letter.  I had received a formal 
answer acknowledging its receipt and saying, "We note the contents 
thereof, which shall be duly communicated to our client."  After 
that I sometimes heard Miss Donny and her sister mention how 
regular my accounts were paid, and about twice a year I ventured to 
write a similar letter.  I always received by return of post 
exactly the same answer in the same round hand, with the signature 
of Kenge and Carboy in another writing, which I supposed to be Mr. 
Kenge's.

It seems so curious to me to be obliged to write all this about 
myself!  As if this narrative were the narrative of MY life!  But 
my little body will soon fall into the background now.

Six quiet years (I find I am saying it for the second time) I had 
passed at Greenleaf, seeing in those around me, as it might be in a 
looking-glass, every stage of my own growth and change there, when, 
one November morning, I received this letter.  I omit the date.


Old Square, Lincoln's Inn

Madam,

Jarndyce and Jarndyce

Our clt Mr. Jarndyce being abt to rece into his house, under an 
Order of the Ct of Chy, a Ward of the Ct in this cause, for whom he 
wishes to secure an elgble compn, directs us to inform you that he 
will be glad of your serces in the afsd capacity.

We have arrngd for your being forded, carriage free, pr eight 
o'clock coach from Reading, on Monday morning next, to White Horse 
Cellar, Piccadilly, London, where one of our clks will be in 
waiting to convey you to our offe as above.

We are, Madam, Your obedt Servts,

Kenge and Carboy

Miss Esther Summerson


Oh, never, never, never shall I forget the emotion this letter 
caused in the house!  It was so tender in them to care so much for 
me, it was so gracious in that father who had not forgotten me to 
have made my orphan way so smooth and easy and to have inclined so 
many youthful natures towards me, that I could hardly bear it.  Not 
that I would have had them less sorry--I am afraid not; but the 
pleasure of it, and the pain of it, and the pride and joy of it, 
and the humble regret of it were so blended that my heart seemed 
almost breaking while it was full of rapture.

The letter gave me only five days' notice of my removal.  When 
every minute added to the proofs of love and kindness that were 
given me in those five days, and when at last the morning came and 
when they took me through all the rooms that I might see them for 
the last time, and when some cried, "Esther, dear, say good-bye to 
me here at my bedside, where you first spoke so kindly to me!" and 
when others asked me only to write their names, "With Esther's 
love," and when they all surrounded me with their parting presents 
and clung to me weeping and cried, "What shall we do when dear, 
dear Esther's gone!" and when I tried to tell them how forbearing 
and how good they had all been to me and how I blessed and thanked 
them every one, what a heart I had!

And when the two Miss Donnys grieved as much to part with me as the 
least among them, and when the maids said, "Bless you, miss, 
wherever you go!" and when the ugly lame old gardener, who I 
thought had hardly noticed me in all those years, came panting 
after the coach to give me a little nosegay of geraniums and told 
me I had been the light of his eyes--indeed the old man said so!--
what a heart I had then!

And could I help it if with all this, and the coming to the little 
school, and the unexpected sight of the poor children outside 
waving their hats and bonnets to me, and of a grey-haired gentleman 
and lady whose daughter I had helped to teach and at whose house I 
had visited (who were said to be the proudest people in all that 
country), caring for nothing but calling out, "Good-bye, Esther.  
May you be very happy!"--could I help it if I was quite bowed down 
in the coach by myself and said "Oh, I am so thankful, I am so 
thankful!" many times over!

But of course I soon considered that I must not take tears where I 
was going after all that had been done for me.  Therefore, of 
course, I made myself sob less and persuaded myself to be quiet by 
saying very often, "Esther, now you really must!  This WILL NOT 
do!" I cheered myself up pretty well at last, though I am afraid I 
was longer about it than I ought to have been; and when I had 
cooled my eyes with lavender water, it was time to watch for 
London.

I was quite persuaded that we were there when we were ten miles 
off, and when we really were there, that we should never get there.  
However, when we began to jolt upon a stone pavement, and 
particularly when every other conveyance seemed to be running into 
us, and we seemed to be running into every other conveyance, I 
began to believe that we really were approaching the end of our 
journey.  Very soon afterwards we stopped.

A young gentleman who had inked himself by accident addressed me 
from the pavement and said, "I am from Kenge and Carboy's, miss, of 
Lincoln's Inn."

"If you please, sir," said I.

He was very obliging, and as he handed me into a fly after 
superintending the removal of my boxes, I asked him whether there 
was a great fire anywhere?  For the streets were so full of dense 
brown smoke that scarcely anything was to be seen.

"Oh, dear no, miss," he said.  "This is a London particular."

I had never heard of such a thing.

"A fog, miss," said the young gentleman.

"Oh, indeed!" said I.

We drove slowly through the dirtiest and darkest streets that ever 
were seen in the world (I thought) and in such a distracting state 
of confusion that I wondered how the people kept their senses, 
until we passed into sudden quietude under an old gateway and drove 
on through a silent square until we came to an odd nook in a 
corner, where there was an entrance up a steep, broad flight of 
stairs, like an entrance to a church.  And there really was a 
churchyard outside under some cloisters, for I saw the gravestones 
from the staircase window.

This was Kenge and Carboy's.  The young gentleman showed me through 
an outer office into Mr. Kenge's room--there was no one in it--and 
politely put an arm-chair for me by the fire.  He then called my 
attention to a little looking-glass hanging from a nail on one side 
of the chimney-piece.

"In case you should wish to look at yourself, miss, after the 
journey, as you're going before the Chancellor.  Not that it's 
requisite, I am sure," said the young gentleman civilly.

"Going before the Chancellor?" I said, startled for a moment.

"Only a matter of form, miss," returned the young gentleman.  "Mr. 
Kenge is in court now.  He left his compliments, and would you 
partake of some refreshment"--there were biscuits and a decanter of 
wine on a small table--"and look over the paper," which the young 
gentleman gave me as he spoke.  He then stirred the fire and left 
me.

Everything was so strange--the stranger from its being night in the 
day-time, the candles burning with a white flame, and looking raw 
and cold--that I read the words in the newspaper without knowing 
what they meant and found myself reading the same words repeatedly.  
As it was of no use going on in that way, I put the paper down, 
took a peep at my bonnet in the glass to see if it was neat, and 
looked at the room, which was not half lighted, and at the shabby, 
dusty tables, and at the piles of writings, and at a bookcase full 
of the most inexpressive-looking books that ever had anything to 
say for themselves.  Then I went on, thinking, thinking, thinking; 
and the fire went on, burning, burning, burning; and the candles 
went on flickering and guttering, and there were no snuffers--until 
the young gentleman by and by brought a very dirty pair--for two 
hours.

At last Mr. Kenge came.  HE was not altered, but he was surprised 
to see how altered I was and appeared quite pleased.  "As you are 
going to be the companion of the young lady who is now in the 
Chancellor's private room, Miss Summerson," he said, "we thought it 
well that you should be in attendance also.  You will not be 
discomposed by the Lord Chancellor, I dare say?"

"No, sir," I said, "I don't think I shall," really not seeing on 
consideration why I should be.

So Mr. Kenge gave me his arm and we went round the corner, under a 
colonnade, and in at a side door.  And so we came, along a passage, 
into a comfortable sort of room where a young lady and a young 
gentleman were standing near a great, loud-roaring fire.  A screen 
was interposed between them and it, and they were leaning on the 
screen, talking.

They both looked up when I came in, and I saw in the young lady, 
with the fire shining upon her, such a beautiful girl!  With such 
rich golden hair, such soft blue eyes, and such a bright, innocent, 
trusting face!

"Miss Ada," said Mr. Kenge, "this is Miss Summerson."

She came to meet me with a smile of welcome and her hand extended, 
but seemed to change her mind in a moment and kissed me.  In short, 
she had such a natural, captivating, winning manner that in a few 
minutes we were sitting in the window-seat, with the light of the 
fire upon us, talking together as free and happy as could be.

What a load off my mind!  It was so delightful to know that she 
could confide in me and like me!  It was so good of her, and so 
encouraging to me!

The young gentleman was her distant cousin, she told me, and his 
name Richard Carstone.  He was a handsome youth with an ingenuous 
face and a most engaging laugh; and after she had called him up to 
where we sat, he stood by us, in the light of the fire, talking 
gaily, like a light-hearted boy.  He was very young, not more than 
nineteen then, if quite so much, but nearly two years older than 
she was.  They were both orphans and (what was very unexpected and 
curious to me) had never met before that day.  Our all three coming 
together for the first time in such an unusual place was a thing to 
talk about, and we talked about it; and the fire, which had left 
off roaring, winked its red eyes at us--as Richard said--like a 
drowsy old Chancery lion.

We conversed in a low tone because a full-dressed gentleman in a 
bag wig frequenfly came in and out, and when he did so, we could 
hear a drawling sound in the distance, which he said was one of the 
counsel in our case addressing the Lord Chancellor.  He told Mr. 
Kenge that the Chancellor would be up in five minutes; and 
presently we heard a bustle and a tread of feet, and Mr. Kenge said 
that the Court had risen and his lordship was in the next room.

The gentleman in the bag wig opened the door almost directly and 
requested Mr. Kenge to come in.  Upon that, we all went into the 
next room, Mr. Kenge first, with my darling--it is so natural to me 
now that I can't help writing it; and there, plainly dressed in 
black and sitting in an arm-chair at a table near the fire, was his 
lordship, whose robe, trimmed with beautiful gold lace, was thrown 
upon another chair.  He gave us a searching look as we entered, but 
his manner was both courtly and kind.

The gentleman in the bag wig laid bundles of papers on his 
lordship's table, and his lordship silently selected one and turned 
over the leaves.

"Miss Clare," said the Lord Chancellor.  "Miss Ada Clare?"

Mr. Kenge presented her, and his lordship begged her to sit down 
near him.  That he admired her and was interested by her even I 
could see in a moment.  It touched me that the home of such a 
beautiful young creature should be represented by that dry, 
official place.  The Lord High Chancellor, at his best, appeared so 
poor a substitute for the love and pride of parents.

"The Jarndyce in question," said the Lord Chancellor, still turning 
over leaves, "is Jarndyce of Bleak House."

"Jarndyce of Bleak House, my lord," said Mr. Kenge.

"A dreary name," said the Lord Chancellor.

"But not a dreary place at present, my lord," said Mr. Kenge.

"And Bleak House," said his lordship, "is in--"

"Hertfordshire, my lord."

"Mr. Jarndyce of Bleak House is not married?" said his lordship.

"He is not, my lord," said Mr. Kenge.

A pause.

"Young Mr. Richard Carstone is present?" said the Lord Chancellor, 
glancing towards him.

Richard bowed and stepped forward.

"Hum!" said the Lord Chancellor, turning over more leaves.

"Mr. Jarndyce of Bleak House, my lord," Mr. Kenge observed in a low 
voice, "if I may venture to remind your lordship, provides a 
suitable companion for--"

"For Mr. Richard Carstone?" I thought (but I am not quite sure) I 
heard his lordship say in an equally low voice and with a smile.

"For Miss Ada Clare.  This is the young lady.  Miss Summerson."

His lordship gave me an indulgent look and acknowledged my curtsy 
very graciously.

"Miss Summerson is not related to any party in the cause, I think?"

"No, my lord."

Mr. Kenge leant over before it was quite said and whispered.  His 
lordship, with his eyes upon his papers, listened, nodded twice or 
thrice, turned over more leaves, and did not look towards me again 
until we were going away.

Mr. Kenge now retired, and Richard with him, to where I was, near 
the door, leaving my pet (it is so natural to me that again I can't 
help it!) sitting near the Lord Chancellor, with whom his lordship 
spoke a little part, asking her, as she told me afterwards, whether 
she had well reflected on the proposed arrangement, and if she 
thought she would be happy under the roof of Mr. Jarndyce of Bleak 
House, and why she thought so?  Presently he rose courteously and 
released her, and then he spoke for a minute or two with Richard 
Carstone, not seated, but standing, and altogether with more ease 
and less ceremony, as if he still knew, though he WAS Lord 
Chancellor, how to go straight to the candour of a boy.

"Very well!" said his lordship aloud.  "I shall make the order.  
Mr. Jarndyce of Bleak House has chosen, so far as I may judge," and 
this was when he looked at me, "a very good companion for the young 
lady, and the arrangement altogether seems the best of which the 
circumstances admit."

He dismissed us pleasantly, and we all went out, very much obliged 
to him for being so affable and polite, by which he had certainly 
lost no dignity but seemed to us to have gained some.

When we got under the colonnade, Mr. Kenge remembered that he must 
go back for a moment to ask a question and left us in the fog, with 
the Lord Chancellor's carriage and servants waiting for him to come 
out.

"Well!" said Richard Carstone.  "THAT'S over!  And where do we go 
next, Miss Summerson?"

"Don't you know?" I said.

"Not in the least," said he.

"And don't YOU know, my love?" I asked Ada.

"No!" said she.  "Don't you?"

"Not at all!" said I.

We looked at one another, half laughing at our being like the 
children in the wood, when a curious little old woman in a squeezed 
bonnet and carrying a reticule came curtsying and smiling up to us 
with an air of great ceremony.

"Oh!" said she.  "The wards in Jarndyce!  Ve-ry happy, I am sure, 
to have the honour!  It is a good omen for youth, and hope, and 
beauty when they find themselves in this place, and don't know 
what's to come of it."

"Mad!" whispered Richard, not thinking she could hear him.

"Right!  Mad, young gentleman," she returned so quickly that he was 
quite abashed.  "I was a ward myself.  I was not mad at that time," 
curtsying low and smiling between every little sentence.  "I had 
youth and hope.  I believe, beauty.  It matters very little now.  
Neither of the three served or saved me.  I have the honour to 
attend court regularly.  With my documents.  I expect a judgment.  
Shortly.  On the Day of Judgment.  I have discovered that the sixth 
seal mentioned in the Revelations is the Great Seal.  It has been 
open a long time!  Pray accept my blessing."

As Ada was a little frightened, I said, to humour the poor old 
lady, that we were much obliged to her.

"Ye-es!" she said mincingly.  "I imagine so.  And here is 
Conversation Kenge.  With HIS documents!  How does your honourable 
worship do?"

"Quite well, quite well!  Now don't be troublesome, that's a good 
soul!" said Mr. Kenge, leading the way back.

"By no means," said the poor old lady, keeping up with Ada and me.  
"Anything but troublesome.  I shall confer estates on both--which 
is not being troublesome, I trust?  I expect a judgment.  Shortly.  
On the Day of Judgment.  This is a good omen for you.  Accept my 
blessing!"

She stopped at the bottom of the steep, broad flight of stairs; but 
we looked back as we went up, and she was still there, saying, 
still with a curtsy and a smile between every little sentence, 
"Youth.  And hope.  And beauty.  And Chancery.  And Conversation 
Kenge!  Ha!  Pray accept my blessing!"



CHAPTER IV

Telescopic Philanthropy


We were to pass the night, Mr. Kenge told us when we arrived in his 
room, at Mrs. Jellyby's; and then he turned to me and said he took 
it for granted I knew who Mrs. Jellyby was.

"I really don't, sir," I returned.  "Perhaps Mr. Carstone--or Miss 
Clare--"

But no, they knew nothing whatever about Mrs. Jellyby.  "In-deed!  
Mrs. Jellyby," said Mr. Kenge, standing with his back to the fire 
and casting his eyes over the dusty hearth-rug as if it were Mrs. 
Jellyby's biography, "is a lady of very remarkable strength of 
character who devotes herself entirely to the public.  She has 
devoted herself to an extensive variety of public subjects at 
various times and is at present (until something else attracts her) 
devoted to the subject of Africa, with a view to the general 
cultivation of the coffee berry--AND the natives--and the happy 
settlement, on the banks of the African rivers, of our 
superabundant home population.  Mr. Jarndyce, who is desirous to 
aid any work that is considered likely to be a good work and who is 
much sought after by philanthropists, has, I believe, a very high 
opinion of Mrs. Jellyby."

Mr. Kenge, adjusting his cravat, then looked at us.

"And Mr. Jellyby, sir?" suggested Richard.

"Ah!  Mr. Jellyby," said Mr. Kenge, "is--a--I don't know that I can 
describe him to you better than by saying that he is the husband of 
Mrs. Jellyby."

"A nonentity, sir?" said Richard with a droll look.

"I don't say that," returned Mr. Kenge gravely.  "I can't say that, 
indeed, for I know nothing whatever OF Mr. Jellyby.  I never, to my 
knowledge, had the pleasure of seeing Mr. Jellyby.  He may be a 
very superior man, but he is, so to speak, merged--merged--in the 
more shining qualities of his wife."  Mr. Kenge proceeded to tell 
us that as the road to Bleak House would have been very long, dark, 
and tedious on such an evening, and as we had been travelling 
already, Mr. Jarndyce had himself proposed this arrangement.  A 
carriage would be at Mrs. Jellyby's to convey us out of town early 
in the forenoon of to-morrow.

He then rang a little bell, and the young gentleman came in.  
Addressing him by the name of Guppy, Mr. Kenge inquired whether 
Miss Summerson's boxes and the rest of the baggage had been "sent 
round."  Mr. Guppy said yes, they had been sent round, and a coach 
was waiting to take us round too as soon as we pleased.

"Then it only remains," said Mr. Kenge, shaking hands with us, "for 
me to express my lively satisfaction in (good day, Miss Clare!) the 
arrangement this day concluded and my (GOOD-bye to you, Miss 
Summerson!) lively hope that it will conduce to the happiness, the 
(glad to have had the honour of making your acquaintance, Mr. 
Carstone!) welfare, the advantage in all points of view, of all 
concerned!  Guppy, see the party safely there."

"Where IS 'there,' Mr. Guppy?" said Richard as we went downstairs.

"No distance," said Mr. Guppy; "round in Thavies Inn, you know."

"I can't say I know where it is, for I come from Winchester and am 
strange in London."

"Only round the corner," said Mr. Guppy.  "We just twist up 
Chancery Lane, and cut along Holborn, and there we are in four 
minutes' time, as near as a toucher.  This is about a London 
particular NOW, ain't it, miss?"  He seemed quite delighted with it 
on my account.

"The fog is very dense indeed!" said I.

"Not that it affects you, though, I'm sure," said Mr. Guppy, 
putting up the steps.  "On the contrary, it seems to do you good, 
miss, judging from your appearance."

I knew he meant well in paying me this compliment, so I laughed at 
myself for blushing at it when he had shut the door and got upon 
the box; and we all three laughed and chatted about our 
inexperience and the strangeness of London until we turned up under 
an archway to our destination--a narrow street of high houses like 
an oblong cistern to hold the fog.  There was a confused little 
crowd of people, principally children, gathered about the house at 
which we stopped, which had a tarnished brass plate on the door 
with the inscription JELLYBY.

"Don't be frightened!" said Mr. Guppy, looking in at the coach-
window.  "One of the young Jellybys been and got his head through 
the area railings!"

"Oh, poor child," said I; "let me out, if you please!"

"Pray be careful of yourself, miss.  The young Jellybys are always 
up to something," said Mr. Guppy.

I made my way to the poor child, who was one of the dirtiest little 
unfortunates I ever saw, and found him very hot and frightened and 
crying loudly, fixed by the neck between two iron railings, while a 
milkman and a beadle, with the kindest intentions possible, were 
endeavouring to drag him back by the legs, under a general 
impression that his skull was compressible by those means.  As I 
found (after pacifying him) that he was a little boy with a 
naturally large head, I thought that perhaps where his head could 
go, his body could follow, and mentioned that the best mode of 
extrication might be to push him forward.  This was so favourably 
received by the milkman and beadle that he would immediately have 
been pushed into the area if I had not held his pinafore while 
Richard and Mr. Guppy ran down through the kitchen to catch him 
when he should be released.  At last he was happily got down 
without any accident, and then he began to beat Mr. Guppy with a 
hoop-stick in quite a frantic manner.

Nobody had appeared belonging to the house except a person in 
pattens, who had been poking at the child from below with a broom; 
I don't know with what object, and I don't think she did.  I 
therefore supposed that Mrs. Jellyby was not at home, and was quite 
surprised when the person appeared in the passage without the 
pattens, and going up to the back room on the first floor before 
Ada and me, announced us as, "Them two young ladies, Missis 
Jellyby!"  We passed several more children on the way up, whom it 
was difficult to avoid treading on in the dark; and as we came into 
Mrs. Jellyby's presence, one of the poor little things fell 
downstairs--down a whole flight (as it sounded to me), with a great 
noise.

Mrs. Jellyby, whose face reflected none of the uneasiness which we 
could not help showing in our own faces as the dear child's head 
recorded its passage with a bump on every stair--Richard afterwards 
said he counted seven, besides one for the landing--received us 
with perfect equanimity.  She was a pretty, very diminutive, plump 
woman of from forty to fifty, with handsome eyes, though they had a 
curious habit of seeming to look a long way off.  As if--I am 
quoting Richard again--they could see nothing nearer than Africa!

"I am very glad indeed," said Mrs. Jellyby in an agreeable voice, 
"to have the pleasure of receiving you.  I have a great respect for 
Mr. Jarndyce, and no one in whom he is interested can be an object 
of indifference to me."

We expressed our acknowledgments and sat down behind the door, 
where there was a lame invalid of a sofa.  Mrs. Jellyby had very 
good hair but was too much occupied with her African duties to 
brush it.  The shawl in which she had been loosely muffled dropped 
onto her chair when she advanced to us; and as she turned to resume 
her seat, we could not help noticing that her dress didn't nearly 
meet up the back and that the open space was railed across with a 
lattice-work of stay-lace--like a summer-house.

The room, which was strewn with papers and nearly filled by a great 
writing-table covered with similar litter, was, I must say, not 
only very untidy but very dirty.  We were obliged to take notice of 
that with our sense of sight, even while, with our sense of 
hearing, we followed the poor child who had tumbled downstairs: I 
think into the back kitchen, where somebody seemed to stifle him.

But what principally struck us was a jaded and unhealthy-looking 
though by no means plain girl at the writing-table, who sat biting 
the feather of her pen and staring at us.  I suppose nobody ever 
was in such a state of ink.  And from her tumbled hair to her 
pretty feet, which were disfigured with frayed and broken satin 
slippers trodden down at heel, she really seemed to have no article 
of dress upon her, from a pin upwards, that was in its proper 
condition or its right place.

"You find me, my dears," said Mrs. Jellyby, snuffing the two great 
office candles in tin candlesticks, which made the room taste 
strongly of hot tallow (the fire had gone out, and there was 
nothing in the grate but ashes, a bundle of wood, and a poker), 
"you find me, my dears, as usual, very busy; but that you will 
excuse.  The African project at present employs my whole time.  It 
involves me in correspondence with public bodies and with private 
individuals anxious for the welfare of their species all over the 
country.  I am happy to say it is advancing.  We hope by this time 
next year to have from a hundred and fifty to two hundred healthy 
families cultivating coffee and educating the natives of 
Borrioboola-Gha, on the left bank of the Niger."

As Ada said nothing, but looked at me, I said it must be very 
gratifying.

"It IS gratifying," said Mrs. Jellyby.  "It involves the devotion 
of all my energies, such as they are; but that is nothing, so that 
it succeeds; and I am more confident of success every day.  Do you 
know, Miss Summerson, I almost wonder that YOU never turned your 
thoughts to Africa."

This application of the subject was really so unexpected to me that 
I was quite at a loss how to receive it.  I hinted that the 
climate--

"The finest climate in the world!" said Mrs. Jellyby.

"Indeed, ma'am?"

"Certainly.  With precaution," said Mrs. Jellyby.  "You may go into 
Holborn, without precaution, and be run over.  You may go into 
Holborn, with precaution, and never be run over.  Just so with 
Africa."

I said, "No doubt."  I meant as to Holborn.

"If you would like," said Mrs. Jellyby, putting a number of papers 
towards us, "to look over some remarks on that head, and on the 
general subject, which have been extensively circulated, while I 
finish a letter I am now dictating to my eldest daughter, who is my 
amanuensis--"

The girl at the table left off biting her pen and made a return to 
our recognition, which was half bashful and half sulky.

"--I shall then have finished for the present," proceeded Mrs. 
Jellyby with a sweet smile, "though my work is never done.  Where 
are you, Caddy?"

"'Presents her compliments to Mr. Swallow, and begs--'" said Caddy.

"'And begs,'" said Mrs. Jellyby, dictating, "'to inform him, in 
reference to his letter of inquiry on the African project--' No, 
Peepy!  Not on my account!"

Peepy (so self-named) was the unfortunate child who had fallen 
downstairs, who now interrupted the correspondence by presenting 
himself, with a strip of plaster on his forehead, to exhibit his 
wounded knees, in which Ada and I did not know which to pity most--
the bruises or the dirt.  Mrs. Jellyby merely added, with the 
serene composure with which she said everything, "Go along, you 
naughty Peepy!" and fixed her fine eyes on Africa again.

However, as she at once proceeded with her dictation, and as I 
interrupted nothing by doing it, I ventured quietly to stop poor 
Peepy as he was going out and to take him up to nurse.  He looked 
very much astonished at it and at Ada's kissing him, but soon fell 
fast asleep in my arms, sobbing at longer and longer intervals, 
until he was quiet.  I was so occupied with Peepy that I lost the 
letter in detail, though I derived such a general impression from 
it of the momentous importance of Africa, and the utter 
insignificance of all other places and things, that I felt quite 
ashamed to have thought so little about it.

"Six o'clock!" said Mrs. Jellyby.  "And our dinner hour is 
nominally (for we dine at all hours) five!  Caddy, show Miss Clare 
and Miss Summerson their rooms.  You will like to make some change, 
perhaps?  You will excuse me, I know, being so much occupied.  Oh, 
that very bad child!  Pray put him down, Miss Summerson!"

I begged permission to retain him, truly saying that he was not at 
all troublesome, and carried him upstairs and laid him on my bed.  
Ada and I had two upper rooms with a door of communication between.  
They were excessively bare and disorderly, and the curtain to my 
window was fastened up with a fork.

"You would like some hot water, wouldn't you?" said Miss Jellyby, 
looking round for a jug with a handle to it, but looking in vain.

"If it is not being troublesome," said we.

"Oh, it's not the trouble," returned Miss Jellyby; "the question 
is, if there IS any."

The evening was so very cold and the rooms had such a marshy smell 
that I must confess it was a little miserable, and Ada was half 
crying.  We soon laughed, however, and were busily unpacking when 
Miss Jellyby came back to say that she was sorry there was no hot 
water, but they couldn't find the kettle, and the boiler was out of 
order.

We begged her not to mention it and made all the haste we could to 
get down to the fire again.  But all the little children had come 
up to the landing outside to look at the phenomenon of Peepy lying 
on my bed, and our attention was distracted by the constant 
apparition of noses and fingers in situations of danger between the 
hinges of the doors.  It was impossible to shut the door of either 
room, for my lock, with no knob to it, looked as if it wanted to be 
wound up; and though the handle of Ada's went round and round with 
the greatest smoothness, it was attended with no effect whatever on 
the door.  Therefore I proposed to the children that they should 
come in and be very good at my table, and I would tell them the 
story of Little Red Riding Hood while I dressed; which they did, 
and were as quiet as mice, including Peepy, who awoke opportunely 
before the appearance of the wolf.

When we went downstairs we found a mug with "A Present from 
Tunbridge Wells" on it lighted up in the staircase window with a 
floating wick, and a young woman, with a swelled face bound up in a 
flannel bandage blowing the fire of the drawing-room (now connected 
by an open door with Mrs. Jellyby's room) and choking dreadfully.  
It smoked to that degree, in short, that we all sat coughing and 
crying with the windows open for half an hour, during which Mrs. 
Jellyby, with the same sweetness of temper, directed letters about 
Africa.  Her being so employed was, I must say, a great relief to 
me, for Richard told us that he had washed his hands in a pie-dish 
and that they had found the kettle on his dressing-table, and he 
made Ada laugh so that they made me laugh in the most ridiculous 
manner.

Soon after seven o'clock we went down to dinner, carefully, by Mrs. 
Jellyby's advice, for the stair-carpets, besides being very 
deficient in stair-wires, were so torn as to be absolute traps.  We 
had a fine cod-fish, a piece of roast beef, a dish of cutlets, and 
a pudding; an excellent dinner, if it had had any cooking to speak 
of, but it was almost raw.  The young woman with the flannel 
bandage waited, and dropped everything on the table wherever it 
happened to go, and never moved it again until she put it on the 
stairs.  The person I had seen in pattens, who I suppose to have 
been the cook, frequently came and skirmished with her at the door, 
and there appeared to be ill will between them.

All through dinner--which was long, in consequence of such 
accidents as the dish of potatoes being mislaid in the coal skuttle 
and the handle of the corkscrew coming off and striking the young 
woman in the chin--Mrs. Jellyby preserved the evenness of her 
disposition.  She told us a great deal that was interesting about 
Borrioboola-Gha and the natives, and received so many letters that 
Richard, who sat by her, saw four envelopes in the gravy at once.  
Some of the letters were proceedings of ladies' committees or 
resolutions of ladies' meetings, which she read to us; others were 
applications from people excited in various ways about the 
cultivation of coffee, and natives; others required answers, and 
these she sent her eldest daughter from the table three or four 
times to write.  She was full of business and undoubtedly was, as 
she had told us, devoted to the cause.

I was a little curious to know who a mild bald gentleman in 
spectacles was, who dropped into a vacant chair (there was no top 
or bottom in particular) after the fish was taken away and seemed 
passively to submit himself to Borriohoola-Gha but not to be 
actively interested in that settlement.  As he never spoke a word, 
he might have been a native but for his complexion.  It was not 
until we left the table and he remained alone with Richard that the 
possibility of his being Mr. Jellyby ever entered my head.  But he 
WAS Mr. Jellyby; and a loquacious young man called Mr. Quale, with 
large shining knobs for temples and his hair all brushed to the 
back of his head, who came in the evening, and told Ada he was a 
philanthropist, also informed her that he called the matrimonial 
alliance of Mrs. Jellyby with Mr. Jellyby the union of mind and 
matter.

This young man, besides having a great deal to say for himself 
about Africa and a project of his for teaching the coffee colonists 
to teach the natives to turn piano-forte legs and establish an 
export trade, delighted in drawing Mrs. Jellyby out by saving, "I 
believe now, Mrs. Jellyby, you have received as many as from one 
hundred and fifty to two hundred letters respecting Africa in a 
single day, have you not?" or, "If my memory does not deceive me, 
Mrs. Jellyby, you once mentioned that you had sent off five 
thousand circulars from one post-office at one time?"--always 
repeating Mrs. Jellyby's answer to us like an interpreter.  During 
the whole evening, Mr. Jellyby sat in a corner with his head 
against the wall as if he were subject to low spirits.  It seemed 
that he had several times opened his mouth when alone with Richard 
after dinner, as if he had something on his mind, but had always 
shut it again, to Richard's extreme confusion, without saying 
anything.

Mrs. Jellyby, sitting in quite a nest of waste paper, drank coffee 
all the evening and dictated at intervals to her eldest daughter.  
She also held a discussion with Mr. Quale, of which the subject 
seemed to be--if I understood it--the brotherhood of humanity, and 
gave utterance to some beautiful sentiments.  I was not so 
attentive an auditor as I might have wished to be, however, for 
Peepy and the other children came flocking about Ada and me in a 
corner of the drawing-room to ask for another story; so we sat down 
among them and told them in whispers "Puss in Boots" and I don't 
know what else until Mrs. Jellyby, accidentally remembering them, 
sent them to bed.  As Peepy cried for me to take him to bed, I 
carried him upstairs, where the young woman with the flannel 
bandage charged into the midst of the little family like a dragon 
and overturned them into cribs.

After that I occupied myself in making our room a little tidy and 
in coaxing a very cross fire that had been lighted to burn, which 
at last it did, quite brightly.  On my return downstairs, I felt 
that Mrs. Jellyby looked down upon me rather for being so 
frivolous, and I was sorry for it, though at the same time I knew 
that I had no higher pretensions.

It was nearly midnight before we found an opportunity of going to 
bed, and even then we left Mrs. Jellyby among her papers drinking 
coffee and Miss Jellyby biting the feather of her pen.

"What a strange house!" said Ada when we got upstairs.  "How 
curious of my cousin Jarndyce to send us here!"

"My love," said I, "it quite confuses me.  I want to understand it, 
and I can't understand it at all."

"What?" asked Ada with her pretty smile.

"All this, my dear," said I.  "It MUST be very good of Mrs. Jellyby 
to take such pains about a scheme for the benefit of natives--and 
yet--Peepy and the housekeeping!"

Ada laughed and put her arm about my neck as I stood looking at the 
fire, and told me I was a quiet, dear, good creature and had won 
her heart.  "You are so thoughtful, Esther," she said, "and yet so 
cheerful!  And you do so much, so unpretendingly!  You would make a 
home out of even this house."

My simple darling!  She was quite unconscious that she only praised 
herself and that it was in the goodness of her own heart that she 
made so much of me!

"May I ask you a question?" said I when we had sat before the fire 
a little while.

"Five hundred," said Ada.

"Your cousin, Mr. Jarndyce.  I owe so much to him.  Would you mind 
describing him to me?"

Shaking her golden hair, Ada turned her eyes upon me with such 
laughing wonder that I was full of wonder too, partly at her 
beauty, partly at her surprise.

"Esther!" she cried.

"My dear!"

"You want a description of my cousin Jarndyce?"

"My dear, I never saw him."

"And I never saw him!" returned Ada.

Well, to be sure!

No, she had never seen him.  Young as she was when her mama died, 
she remembered how the tears would come into her eyes when she 
spoke of him and of the noble generosity of his character, which 
she had said was to be trusted above all earthly things; and Ada 
trusted it.  Her cousin Jarndyce had written to her a few months 
ago--"a plain, honest letter," Ada said--proposing the arrangement 
we were now to enter on and telling her that "in time it might heal 
some of the wounds made by the miserable Chancery suit."  She had 
replied, gratefully accepting his proposal.  Richard had received a 
similar letter and had made a similar response.  He HAD seen Mr. 
Jarndyce once, but only once, five years ago, at Winchester school.  
He had told Ada, when they were leaning on the screen before the 
fire where I found them, that he recollected him as "a bluff, rosy 
fellow."  This was the utmost description Ada could give me.

It set me thinking so that when Ada was asleep, I still remained 
before the fire, wondering and wondering about Bleak House, and 
wondering and wondering that yesterday morning should seem so long 
ago.  I don't know where my thoughts had wandered when they were 
recalled by a tap at the door.

I opened it softly and found Miss Jellyby shivering there with a 
broken candle in a broken candlestick in one hand and an egg-cup in 
the other.

"Good night!" she said very sulkily.

"Good night!" said I.

"May I come in?" she shortly and unexpectedly asked me in the same 
sulky way.

"Certainly," said I.  "Don't wake Miss Clare."

She would not sit down, but stood by the fire dipping her inky 
middle finger in the egg-cup, which contained vinegar, and smearing 
it over the ink stains on her face, frowning the whole time and 
looking very gloomy.

"I wish Africa was dead!" she said on a sudden.

I was going to remonstrate.

"I do!" she said "Don't talk to me, Miss Summerson.  I hate it and 
detest it.  It's a beast!"

I told her she was tired, and I was sorry.  I put my hand upon her 
head, and touched her forehead, and said it was hot now but would 
be cool tomorrow.  She still stood pouting and frowning at me, but 
presently put down her egg-cup and turned softly towards the bed 
where Ada lay.

"She is very pretty!" she said with the same knitted brow and in 
the same uncivil manner.

I assented with a smile.

"An orphan.  Ain't she?"

"Yes."

"But knows a quantity, I suppose?  Can dance, and play music, and 
sing?  She can talk French, I suppose, and do geography, and 
globes, and needlework, and everything?"

"No doubt," said I.

"I can't," she returned.  "I can't do anything hardly, except 
write.  I'm always writing for Ma.  I wonder you two were not 
ashamed of yourselves to come in this afternoon and see me able to 
do nothing else.  It was like your ill nature.  Yet you think 
yourselves very fine, I dare say!"

I could see that the poor girl was near crying, and I resumed my 
chair without speaking and looked at her (I hope) as mildly as I 
felt towards her.

"It's disgraceful," she said.  "You know it is.  The whole house is 
disgraceful.  The children are disgraceful.  I'M disgraceful.  Pa's 
miserable, and no wonder!  Priscilla drinks--she's always drinking.  
It's a great shame and a great story of you if you say you didn't 
smell her today.  It was as bad as a public-house, waiting at 
dinner; you know it was!"

"My dear, I don't know it," said I.

"You do," she said very shortly.  "You shan't say you don't.  You 
do!"

"Oh, my dear!" said I.  "If you won't let me speak--"

"You're speaking now.  You know you are.  Don't tell stories, Miss 
Summerson."

"My dear," said I, "as long as you won't hear me out--"

"I don't want to hear you out."

"Oh, yes, I think you do," said I, "because that would be so very 
unreasonable.  I did not know what you tell me because the servant 
did not come near me at dinner; but I don't doubt what you tell me, 
and I am sorry to hear it."

"You needn't make a merit of that," said she.

"No, my dear," said I.  "That would be very foolish."

She was still standing by the bed, and now stooped down (but still 
with the same discontented face) and kissed Ada.  That done, she 
came softly back and stood by the side of my chair.  Her bosom was 
heaving in a distressful manner that I greatly pitied, but I 
thought it better not to speak.

"I wish I was dead!" she broke out.  "I wish we were all dead.  It 
would be a great deal better for us.

In a moment afterwards, she knelt on the ground at my side, hid her 
face in my dress, passionately begged my pardon, and wept.  I 
comforted her and would have raised her, but she cried no, no; she 
wanted to stay there!

"You used to teach girls," she said, "If you could only have taught 
me, I could have learnt from you!  I am so very miserable, and I 
like you so much!"

I could not persuade her to sit by me or to do anything but move a 
ragged stool to where she was kneeling, and take that, and still 
hold my dress in the same manner.  By degrees the poor tired girl 
fell asleep, and then I contrived to raise her head so that it 
should rest on my lap, and to cover us both with shawls.  The fire 
went out, and all night long she slumbered thus before the ashy 
grate.  At first I was painfully awake and vainly tried to lose 
myself, with my eyes closed, among the scenes of the day.  At 
length, by slow degrees, they became indistinct and mingled.  I 
began to lose the identity of the sleeper resting on me.  Now it 
was Ada, now one of my old Reading friends from whom I could not 
believe I had so recently parted.  Now it was the little mad woman 
worn out with curtsying and smiling, now some one in authority at 
Bleak House.  Lastly, it was no one, and I was no one.

The purblind day was feebly struggling with the fog when I opened 
my eyes to encounter those of a dirty-faced little spectre fixed 
upon me.  Peepy had scaled his crib, and crept down in his bed-gown 
and cap, and was so cold that his teeth were chattering as if he 
had cut them all.



CHAPTER V

A Morning Adventure


Although the morning was raw, and although the fog still seemed 
heavy--I say seemed, for the windows were so encrusted with dirt 
that they would have made midsummer sunshine dim--I was 
sufficiently forewarned of the discomfort within doors at that 
early hour and sufficiently curious about London to think it a good 
idea on the part of Miss Jellyby when she proposed that we should 
go out for a walk.

"Ma won't be down for ever so long," she said, "and then it's a 
chance if breakfast's ready for an hour afterwards, they dawdle so.  
As to Pa, he gets what he can and goes to the office.  He never has 
what you would call a regular breakfast.  Priscilla leaves him out 
the loaf and some milk, when there is any, overnight.  Sometimes 
there isn't any milk, and sometimes the cat drinks it.  But I'm 
afraid you must be tired, Miss Summerson, and perhaps you would 
rather go to bed."

"I am not at all tired, my dear," said I, "and would much prefer to 
go out."

"If you're sure you would," returned Miss Jellyby, "I'll get my 
things on."

Ada said she would go too, and was soon astir.  I made a proposal 
to Peepy, in default of being able to do anything better for him, 
that he should let me wash him and afterwards lay him down on my 
bed again.  To this he submitted with the best grace possible, 
staring at me during the whole operation as if he never had been, 
and never could again be, so astonished in his life--looking very 
miserable also, certainly, but making no complaint, and going 
snugly to sleep as soon as it was over.  At first I was in two 
minds about taking such a liberty, but I soon reflected that nobody 
in the house was likely to notice it.

What with the bustle of dispatching Peepy and the bustle of getting 
myself ready and helping Ada, I was soon quite in a glow.  We found 
Miss Jellyby trying to warm herself at the fire in the writing-
room, which Priscilla was then lighting with a smutty parlour 
candlestick, throwing the candle in to make it burn better.  
Everything was just as we had left it last night and was evidently 
intended to remain so.  Below-stairs the dinner-cloth had not been 
taken away, but had been left ready for breakfast.  Crumbs, dust, 
and waste-paper were all over the house.  Some pewter pots and a 
milk-can hung on the area railings; the door stood open; and we met 
the cook round the corner coming out of a public-house, wiping her 
mouth.  She mentioned, as she passed us, that she had been to see 
what o'clock it was.

But before we met the cook, we met Richard, who was dancing up and 
down Thavies Inn to warm his feet.  He was agreeably surprised to 
see us stirring so soon and said he would gladly share our walk.  
So he took care of Ada, and Miss Jellyby and I went first.  I may 
mention that Miss Jellyby had relapsed into her sulky manner and 
that I really should not have thought she liked me much unless she 
had told me so.

"Where would you wish to go?" she asked.

"Anywhere, my dear," I replied.

"Anywhere's nowhere," said Miss Jellyby, stopping perversely.

"Let us go somewhere at any rate," said I.

She then walked me on very fast.

"I don't care!" she said.  "Now, you are my witness, Miss 
Summerson, I say I don't care-but if he was to come to our house 
with his great, shining, lumpy forehead night after night till he 
was as old as Methuselah, I wouldn't have anything to say to him.  
Such ASSES as he and Ma make of themselves!"

"My dear!" I remonstrated, in allusion to the epithet and the 
vigorous emphasis Miss Jellyby set upon it.  "Your duty as a child--"

"Oh!  Don't talk of duty as a child, Miss Summerson; where's Ma's 
duty as a parent?  All made over to the public and Africa, I 
suppose!  Then let the public and Africa show duty as a child; it's 
much more their affair than mine.  You are shocked, I dare say!  
Very well, so am I shocked too; so we are both shocked, and there's 
an end of it!"

She walked me on faster yet.

"But for all that, I say again, he may come, and come, and come, 
and I won't have anything to say to him.  I can't bear him.  If 
there's any stuff in the world that I hate and detest, it's the 
stuff he and Ma talk.  I wonder the very paving-stones opposite our 
house can have the patience to stay there and be a witness of such 
inconsistencies and contradictions as all that sounding nonsense, 
and Ma's management!"

I could not but understand her to refer to Mr. Quale, the young 
gentleman who had appeared after dinner yesterday.  I was saved the 
disagreeable necessity of pursuing the subject by Richard and Ada 
coming up at a round pace, laughing and asking us if we meant to 
run a race.  Thus interrupted, Miss Jellyby became silent and 
walked moodily on at my side while I admired the long successions 
and varieties of streets, the quantity of people already going to 
and fro, the number of vehicles passing and repassing, the busy 
preparations in the setting forth of shop windows and the sweeping 
out of shops, and the extraordinary creatures in rags secretly 
groping among the swept-out rubbish for pins and other refuse.

"So, cousin," said the cheerful voice of Richard to Ada behind me.  
"We are never to get out of Chancery!  We have come by another way 
to our place of meeting yesterday, and--by the Great Seal, here's 
the old lady again!"

Truly, there she was, immediately in front of us, curtsying, and 
smiling, and saying with her yesterday's air of patronage, "The 
wards in Jarndyce!  Ve-ry happy, I am sure!"

"You are out early, ma'am," said I as she curtsied to me.

"Ye-es!  I usually walk here early.  Before the court sits.  It's 
retired.  I collect my thoughts here for the business of the day," 
said the old lady mincingly.  "The business of the day requires a 
great deal of thought.  Chancery justice is so ve-ry difficult to 
follow."

"Who's this, Miss Summerson?" whispered Miss Jellyby, drawing my 
arm tighter through her own.

The little old lady's hearing was remarkably quick.  She answered 
for herself directly.

"A suitor, my child.  At your service.  I have the honour to attend 
court regularly.  With my documents.  Have I the pleasure of 
addressing another of the youthful parties in Jarndyce?" said the 
old lady, recovering herself, with her head on one side, from a 
very low curtsy.

Richard, anxious to atone for his thoughtlessness of yesterday, 
good-naturedly explained that Miss Jellyby was not connected with 
the suit.

"Ha!" said the old lady.  "She does not expect a judgment?  She 
will still grow old.  But not so old.  Oh, dear, no!  This is the 
garden of Lincoln's Inn.  I call it my garden.  It is quite a bower 
in the summer-time.  Where the birds sing melodiously.  I pass the 
greater part of the long vacation here.  In contemplation.  You 
find the long vacation exceedingly long, don't you?"

We said yes, as she seemed to expect us to say so.

"When the leaves are falling from the trees and there are no more 
flowers in bloom to make up into nosegays for the Lord Chancellor's 
court," said the old lady, "the vacation is fulfilled and the sixth 
seal, mentioned in the Revelations, again prevails.  Pray come and 
see my lodging.  It will be a good omen for me.  Youth, and hope, 
and beauty are very seldom there.  It is a long, long time since I 
had a visit from either."

She had taken my hand, and leading me and Miss Jellyby away, 
beckoned Richard and Ada to come too.  I did not know how to excuse 
myself and looked to Richard for aid.  As he was half amused and 
half curious and all in doubt how to get rid of the old lady 
without offence, she continued to lead us away, and he and Ada 
continued to follow, our strange conductress informing us all the 
time, with much smiling condescension, that she lived close by.

It was quite true, as it soon appeared.  She lived so close by that 
we had not time to have done humouring her for a few moments before 
she was at home.  Slipping us out at a little side gate, the old 
lady stopped most unexpectedly in a narrow back street, part of 
some courts and lanes immediately outside the wall of the inn, and 
said, "This is my lodging.  Pray walk up!"

She had stopped at a shop over which was written KROOK, RAG AND 
BOTTLE WAREHOUSE.  Also, in long thin letters, KROOK, DEALER IN 
MARINE STORES.  In one part of the window was a picture of a red 
paper mill at which a cart was unloading a quantity of sacks of old 
rags.  In another was the inscription BONES BOUGHT.  In another, 
KITCHEN-STUFF BOUGHT.  In another, OLD IRON BOUGHT.  In another, 
WASTE-PAPER BOUGHT.  In another, LADIES' AND GENTLEMEN'S WARDROBES 
BOUGHT.  Everything seemed to be bought and nothing to be sold 
there.  In all parts of the window were quantities of dirty 
bottles--blacking bottles, medicine bottles, ginger-beer and soda-
water bottles, pickle bottles, wine bottles, ink bottles; I am 
reminded by mentioning the latter that the shop had in several 
little particulars the air of being in a legal neighbourhood and of 
being, as it were, a dirty hanger-on and disowned relation of the 
law.  There were a great many ink bottles.  There was a little 
tottering bench of shabby old volumes outside the door, labelled 
"Law Books, all at 9d."  Some of the inscriptions I have enumerated 
were written in law-hand, like the papers I had seen in Kenge and 
Carboy's office and the letters I had so long received from the 
firm.  Among them was one, in the same writing, having nothing to 
do with the business of the shop, but announcing that a respectable 
man aged forty-five wanted engrossing or copying to execute with 
neatness and dispatch: Address to Nemo, care of Mr. Krook, within.  
There were several second-hand bags, blue and red, hanging up.  A 
little way within the shop-door lay heaps of old crackled parchment 
scrolls and discoloured and dog's-eared law-papers.  I could have 
fancied that all the rusty keys, of which there must have been 
hundreds huddled together as old iron, had once belonged to doors 
of rooms or strong chests in lawyers' offices.  The litter of rags 
tumbled partly into and partly out of a one-legged wooden scale, 
hanging without any counterpoise from a beam, might have been 
counsellors' bands and gowns torn up.  One had only to fancy, as 
Richard whispered to Ada and me while we all stood looking in, that 
yonder bones in a corner, piled together and picked very clean, 
were the bones of clients, to make the picture complete.

As it was still foggy and dark, and as the shop was blinded besides 
by the wall of Lincoln's Inn, intercepting the light within a 
couple of yards, we should not have seen so much but for a lighted 
lantern that an old man in spectacles and a hairy cap was carrying 
about in the shop.  Turning towards the door, he now caught sight 
of us.  He was short, cadaverous, and withered, with his head sunk 
sideways between his shoulders and the breath issuing in visible 
smoke from his mouth as if he were on fire within.  His throat, 
chin, and eyebrows were so frosted with white hairs and so gnarled 
with veins and puckered skin that he looked from his breast upward 
like some old root in a fall of snow.

"Hi, hi!" said the old man, coming to the door.  "Have you anything 
to sell?"

We naturally drew back and glanced at our conductress, who had been 
trying to open the house-door with a key she had taken from her 
pocket, and to whom Richard now said that as we had had the 
pleasure of seeing where she lived, we would leave her, being 
pressed for time.  But she was not to be so easily left.  She 
became so fantastically and pressingly earnest in her entreaties 
that we would walk up and see her apartment for an instant, and was 
so bent, in her harmless way, on leading me in, as part of the good 
omen she desired, that I (whatever the others might do) saw nothing 
for it but to comply.  I suppose we were all more or less curious; 
at any rate, when the old man added his persuasions to hers and 
said, "Aye, aye!  Please her!  It won't take a minute!  Come in, 
come in!  Come in through the shop if t'other door's out of order!" 
we all went in, stimulated by Richard's laughing encouragement and 
relying on his protection.

"My landlord, Krook," said the little old lady, condescending to 
him from her lofty station as she presented him to us.  "He is 
called among the neighbours the Lord Chancellor.  His shop is 
called the Court of Chancery.  He is a very eccentric person.  He 
is very odd.  Oh, I assure you he is very odd!"

She shook her head a great many times and tapped her forehead with 
her finger to express to us that we must have the goodness to 
excuse him, "For he is a little--you know--M!" said the old lady 
with great stateliness.  The old man overheard, and laughed.

"It's true enough," he said, going before us with the lantern, 
"that they call me the lord chancellor and call my shop Chancery.  
And why do you think they call me the Lord Chancellor and my shop 
Chancery?"

"I don't know, I am sure!" said Richard rather carelessly.

"You see," said the old man, stopping and turning round, "they--Hi!  
Here's lovely hair!  I have got three sacks of ladies' hair below, 
but none so beautiful and fine as this.  What colour, and what 
texture!"

"That'll do, my good friend!" said Richard, strongly disapproving 
of his having drawn one of Ada's tresses through his yellow hand.  
"You can admire as the rest of us do without taking that liberty."

The old man darted at him a sudden look which even called my 
attention from Ada, who, startled and blushing, was so remarkably 
beautiful that she seemed to fix the wandering attention of the 
little old lady herself.  But as Ada interposed and laughingly said 
she could only feel proud of such genuine admiration, Mr. Krook 
shrunk into his former self as suddenly as he had leaped out of it.

"You see, I have so many things here," he resumed, holding up the 
lantern, "of so many kinds, and all as the neighbours think (but 
THEY know nothing), wasting away and going to rack and ruin, that 
that's why they have given me and my place a christening.  And I 
have so many old parchmentses and papers in my stock.  And I have a 
liking for rust and must and cobwebs.  And all's fish that comes to 
my net.  And I can't abear to part with anything I once lay hold of 
(or so my neighbours think, but what do THEY know?) or to alter 
anything, or to have any sweeping, nor scouring, nor cleaning, nor 
repairing going on about me.  That's the way I've got the ill name 
of Chancery.  I don't mind.  I go to see my noble and learned 
brother pretty well every day, when he sits in the Inn.  He don't 
notice me, but I notice him.  There's no great odds betwixt us.  We 
both grub on in a muddle.  Hi, Lady Jane!"

A large grey cat leaped from some neighbouring shelf on his 
shoulder and startled us all.

"Hi!  Show 'em how you scratch.  Hi!  Tear, my lady!" said her 
master.

The cat leaped down and ripped at a bundle of rags with her 
tigerish claws, with a sound that it set my teeth on edge to hear.

"She'd do as much for any one I was to set her on," said the old 
man.  "I deal in cat-skins among other general matters, and hers 
was offered to me.  It's a very fine skin, as you may see, but I 
didn't have it stripped off!  THAT warn't like Chancery practice 
though, says you!"

He had by this time led us across the shop, and now opened a door 
in the back part of it, leading to the house-entry.  As he stood 
with his hand upon the lock, the little old lady graciously 
observed to him before passing out, "That will do, Krook.  You mean 
well, but are tiresome.  My young friends are pressed for time.  I 
have none to spare myself, having to attend court very soon.  My 
young friends are the wards in Jarndyce."

"Jarndyce!" said the old man with a start.

"Jarndyce and Jarndyce.  The great suit, Krook," returned his 
lodger.

"Hi!" exclaimed the old man in a tone of thoughtful amazement and 
with a wider stare than before.  "Think of it!"

He seemed so rapt all in a moment and looked so curiously at us 
that Richard said, "Why, you appear to trouble yourself a good deal 
about the causes before your noble and learned brother, the other 
Chancellor!"

"Yes," said the old man abstractedly.  "Sure!  YOUR name now will 
be--"

"Richard Carstone."

"Carstone," he repeated, slowly checking off that name upon his 
forefinger; and each of the others he went on to mention upon a 
separate finger.  "Yes.  There was the name of Barbary, and the 
name of Clare, and the name of Dedlock, too, I think."

"He knows as much of the cause as the real salaried Chancellor!" 
said Richard, quite astonished, to Ada and me.

"Aye!" said the old man, coming slowly out of his abstraction.  
"Yes!  Tom Jarndyce--you'll excuse me, being related; but he was 
never known about court by any other name, and was as well known 
there as--she is now," nodding slightly at his lodger.  "Tom 
Jarndyce was often in here.  He got into a restless habit of 
strolling about when the cause was on, or expected, talking to the 
little shopkeepers and telling 'em to keep out of Chancery, 
whatever they did.  'For,' says he, 'it's being ground to bits in a 
slow mill; it's being roasted at a slow fire; it's being stung to 
death by single bees; it's being drowned by drops; it's going mad 
by grains.'  He was as near making away with himself, just where 
the young lady stands, as near could be."

We listened with horror.

"He come in at the door," said the old man, slowly pointing an 
imaginary track along the shop, "on the day he did it--the whole 
neighbourhood had said for months before that he would do it, of a 
certainty sooner or later--he come in at the door that day, and 
walked along there, and sat himself on a bench that stood there, 
and asked me (you'll judge I was a mortal sight younger then) to 
fetch him a pint of wine.  'For,' says he, 'Krook, I am much 
depressed; my cause is on again, and I think I'm nearer judgment 
than I ever was.'  I hadn't a mind to leave him alone; and I 
persuaded him to go to the tavern over the way there, t'other side 
my lane (I mean Chancery Lane); and I followed and looked in at the 
window, and saw him, comfortable as I thought, in the arm-chair by 
the fire, and company with him.  I hadn't hardly got back here when 
I heard a shot go echoing and rattling right away into the inn.  I 
ran out--neighbours ran out--twenty of us cried at once, 'Tom 
Jarndyce!'"

The old man stopped, looked hard at us, looked down into the 
lantern, blew the light out, and shut the lantern up.

"We were right, I needn't tell the present hearers.  Hi!  To be 
sure, how the neighbourhood poured into court that afternoon while 
the cause was on!  How my noble and learned brother, and all the 
rest of 'em, grubbed and muddled away as usual and tried to look as 
if they hadn't heard a word of the last fact in the case or as if 
they had--Oh, dear me!--nothing at all to do with it if they had 
heard of it by any chance!"

Ada's colour had entirely left her, and Richard was scarcely less 
pale.  Nor could I wonder, judging even from my emotions, and I was 
no party in the suit, that to hearts so untried and fresh it was a 
shock to come into the inheritance of a protracted misery, attended 
in the minds of many people with such dreadful recollections.  I 
had another uneasiness, in the application of the painful story to 
the poor half-witted creature who had brought us there; but, to my 
surprise, she seemed perfectly unconscious of that and only led the 
way upstairs again, informing us with the toleration of a superior 
creature for the infirmities of a common mortal that her landlord 
was "a little M, you know!"

She lived at the top of the house, in a pretty large room, from 
which she had a glimpse of Lincoln's Inn Hall.  This seemed to have 
been her principal inducement, originally, for taking up her 
residence there.  She could look at it, she said, in the night, 
especially in the moonshine.  Her room was clean, but very, very 
bare.  I noticed the scantiest necessaries in the way of furniture; 
a few old prints from books, of Chancellors and barristers, wafered 
against the wall; and some half-dozen reticles and work-bags, 
"containing documents," as she informed us.  There were neither 
coals nor ashes in the grate, and I saw no articles of clothing 
anywhere, nor any kind of food.  Upon a shelf in an open cupboard 
were a plate or two, a cup or two, and so forth, but all dry and 
empty.  There was a more affecting meaning in her pinched 
appearance, I thought as I looked round, than I had understood 
before.

"Extremely honoured, I am sure," said our poor hostess with the 
greatest suavity, "by this visit from the wards in Jarndyce.  And 
very much indebted for the omen.  It is a retired situation.  
Considering.  I am limited as to situation.  In consequence of the 
necessity of attending on the Chancellor.  I have lived here many 
years.  I pass my days in court, my evenings and my nights here.  I 
find the nights long, for I sleep but little and think much.  That 
is, of course, unavoidable, being in Chancery.  I am sorry I cannot 
offer chocolate.  I expect a judgment shortly and shall then place 
my establishment on a superior footing.  At present, I don't mind 
confessing to the wards in Jarndyce (in strict confidence) that I 
sometimes find it difficult to keep up a genteel appearance.  I 
have felt the cold here.  I have felt something sharper than cold.  
It matters very little.  Pray excuse the introduction of such mean 
topics."

She partly drew aside the curtain of the long, low garret window 
and called our attention to a number of bird-cages hanging there, 
some containing several birds.  There were larks, linnets, and 
goldfinches--I should think at least twenty.

"I began to keep the little creatures," she said, "with an object 
that the wards will readily comprehend.  With the intention of 
restoring them to liberty.  When my judgment should be given.  Ye-
es!  They die in prison, though.  Their lives, poor silly things, 
are so short in comparison with Chancery proceedings that, one by 
one, the whole collection has died over and over again.  I doubt, 
do you know, whether one of these, though they are all young, will 
live to be free!  Ve-ry mortifying, is it not?"

Although she sometimes asked a question, she never seemed to expect 
a reply, but rambled on as if she were in the habit of doing so 
when no one but herself was present.

"Indeed," she pursued, "I positively doubt sometimes, I do assure 
you, whether while matters are still unsettled, and the sixth or 
Great Seal still prevails, I may not one day be found lying stark 
and senseless here, as I have found so many birds!"

Richard, answering what he saw in Ada's compassionate eyes, took 
the opportunity of laying some money, softly and unobserved, on the 
chimney-piece.  We all drew nearer to the cages, feigning to 
examine the birds.

"I can't allow them to sing much," said the little old lady, "for 
(you'll think this curious) I find my mind confused by the idea 
that they are singing while I am following the arguments in court.  
And my mind requires to be so very clear, you know!  Another time, 
I'll tell you their names.  Not at present.  On a day of such good 
omen, they shall sing as much as they like.  In honour of youth," a 
smile and curtsy, "hope," a smile and curtsy, "and beauty," a smile 
and curtsy.  "There!  We'll let in the full light."

The birds began to stir and chirp.

"I cannot admit the air freely," said the little old lady--the room 
was close, and would have been the better for it--"because the cat 
you saw downstairs, called Lady Jane, is greedy for their lives.  
She crouches on the parapet outside for hours and hours.  I have 
discovered," whispering mysteriously, "that her natural cruelty is 
sharpened by a jealous fear of their regaining their liberty.  In 
consequence of the judgment I expect being shortly given.  She is 
sly and full of malice.  I half believe, sometimes, that she is no 
cat, but the wolf of the old saying.  It is so very difficult to 
keep her from the door."

Some neighbouring bells, reminding the poor soul that it was half-
past nine, did more for us in the way of bringing our visit to an 
end than we could easily have done for ourselves.  She hurriedly 
took up her little bag of documents, which she had laid upon the 
table on coming in, and asked if we were also going into court.  On 
our answering no, and that we would on no account detain her, she 
opened the door to attend us downstairs.

"With such an omen, it is even more necessary than usual that I 
should be there before the Chancellor comes in," said she, "for he 
might mention my case the first thing.  I have a presentiment that 
he WILL mention it the first thing this morning"

She stopped to tell us in a whisper as we were going down that the 
whole house was filled with strange lumber which her landlord had 
bought piecemeal and had no wish to sell, in consequence of being a 
little M.  This was on the first floor.  But she had made a 
previous stoppage on the second floor and had silently pointed at a 
dark door there.

"The only other lodger," she now whispered in explanation, "a law-
writer.  The children in the lanes here say he has sold himself to 
the devil.  I don't know what he can have done with the money.  
Hush!"

She appeared to mistrust that the lodger might hear her even there, 
and repeating "Hush!" went before us on tiptoe as though even the 
sound of her footsteps might reveal to him what she had said.

Passing through the shop on our way out, as we had passed through 
it on our way in, we found the old man storing a quantity of 
packets of waste-paper in a kind of well in the floor.  He seemed 
to be working hard, with the perspiration standing on his forehead, 
and had a piece of chalk by him, with which, as he put each 
separate package or bundle down, he made a crooked mark on the 
panelling of the wall.

Richard and Ada, and Miss Jellyby, and the little old lady had gone 
by him, and I was going when he touched me on the arm to stay me, 
and chalked the letter J upon the wall--in a very curious manner, 
beginning with the end of the letter and shaping it backward.  It 
was a capital letter, not a printed one, but just such a letter as 
any clerk in Messrs. Kenge and Carboy's office would have made.

"Can you read it?" he asked me with a keen glance.

"Surely," said I.  "It's very plain."

"What is it?"

"J."

With another glance at me, and a glance at the door, he rubbed it 
out and turned an "a" in its place (not a capital letter this 
time), and said, "What's that?"

I told him.  He then rubbed that out and turned the letter "r," and 
asked me the same question.  He went on quickly until he had formed 
in the same curious manner, beginning at the ends and bottoms of 
the letters, the word Jarndyce, without once leaving two letters on 
the wall together.

"What does that spell?" he asked me.

When I told him, he laughed.  In the same odd way, yet with the 
same rapidity, he then produced singly, and rubbed out singly, the 
letters forming the words Bleak House.  These, in some 
astonishment, I also read; and he laughed again.

"Hi!" said the old man, laying aside the chalk.  "I have a turn for 
copying from memory, you see, miss, though I can neither read nor 
write."

He looked so disagreeable and his cat looked so wickedly at me, as 
if I were a blood-relation of the birds upstairs, that I was quite 
relieved by Richard's appearing at the door and saying, "Miss 
Summerson, I hope you are not bargaining for the sale of your hair.  
Don't be tempted.  Three sacks below are quite enough for Mr. Krook!"

I lost no time in wishing Mr. Krook good morning and joining my 
friends outside, where we parted with the little old lady, who gave 
us her blessing with great ceremony and renewed her assurance of 
yesterday in reference to her intention of settling estates on Ada 
and me.  Before we finally turned out of those lanes, we looked 
back and saw Mr. Krook standing at his shop-door, in his 
spectacles, looking after us, with his cat upon his shoulder, and 
her tail sticking up on one side of his hairy cap like a tall 
feather.

"Quite an adventure for a morning in London!" said Richard with a 
sigh.  "Ah, cousin, cousin, it's a weary word this Chancery!"

"It is to me, and has been ever since I can remember," returned 
Ada.  "I am grieved that I should be the enemy---as I suppose I am
--of a great number of relations and others, and that they should be 
my enemies--as I suppose they are--and that we should all be 
ruining one another without knowing how or why and be in constant 
doubt and discord all our lives.  It seems very strange, as there 
must be right somewhere, that an honest judge in real earnest has 
not been able to find out through all these years where it is."

"Ah, cousin!" said Richard.  "Strange, indeed!  All this wasteful, 
wanton chess-playing IS very strange.  To see that composed court 
yesterday jogging on so serenely and to think of the wretchedness 
of the pieces on the board gave me the headache and the heartache 
both together.  My head ached with wondering how it happened, if 
men were neither fools nor rascals; and my heart ached to think 
they could possibly be either.  But at all events, Ada--I may call 
you Ada?"

"Of course you may, cousin Richard."

"At all events, Chancery will work none of its bad influences on 
US.  We have happily been brought together, thanks to our good 
kinsman, and it can't divide us now!"

"Never, I hope, cousin Richard!" said Ada gently.

Miss Jellyby gave my arm a squeeze and me a very significant look.  
I smiled in return, and we made the rest of the way back very 
pleasantly.

In half an hour after our arrival, Mrs. Jellyby appeared; and in 
the course of an hour the various things necessary for breakfast 
straggled one by one into the dining-room.  I do not doubt that 
Mrs. Jellyby had gone to bed and got up in the usual manner, but 
she presented no appearance of having changed her dress.  She was 
greatly occupied during breakfast, for the morning's post brought a 
heavy correspondence relative to Borrioboola-Gha, which would 
occasion her (she said) to pass a busy day.  The children tumbled 
about, and notched memoranda of their accidents in their legs, 
which were perfect little calendars of distress; and Peepy was lost 
for an hour and a half, and brought home from Newgate market by a 
policeman.  The equable manner in which Mrs. Jellyby sustained both 
his absence and his restoration to the family circle surprised us 
all.

She was by that time perseveringly dictating to Caddy, and Caddy 
was fast relapsing into the inky condition in which we had found 
her.  At one o'clock an open carriage arrived for us, and a cart 
for our luggage.  Mrs. Jellyby charged us with many remembrances to 
her good friend Mr. Jarndyce; Caddy left her desk to see us depart, 
kissed me in the passage, and stood biting her pen and sobbing on 
the steps; Peepy, I am happy to say, was asleep and spared the pain 
of separation (I was not without misgivings that he had gone to 
Newgate market in search of me); and all the other children got up 
behind the barouche and fell off, and we saw them, with great 
concern, scattered over the surface of Thavies Inn as we rolled out 
of its precincts.



CHAPTER VI

Quite at Home


The day had brightened very much, and still brightened as we went 
westward.  We went our way through the sunshine and the fresh air, 
wondering more and more at the extent of the streets, the 
brilliancy of the shops, the great traffic, and the crowds of 
people whom the pleasanter weather seemed to have brought out like 
many-coloured flowers.  By and by we began to leave the wonderful 
city and to proceed through suburbs which, of themselves, would 
have made a pretty large town in my eyes; and at last we got into a 
real country road again, with windmills, rick-yards, milestones, 
farmers' waggons, scents of old hay, swinging signs, and horse 
troughs: trees, fields, and hedge-rows.  It was delightful to see 
the green landscape before us and the immense metropolis behind; 
and when a waggon with a train of beautiful horses, furnished with 
red trappings and clear-sounding bells, came by us with its music, 
I believe we could all three have sung to the bells, so cheerful 
were the influences around.

"The whole road has been reminding me of my name-sake Whittington," 
said Richard, "and that waggon is the finishing touch.  Halloa!  
What's the matter?"

We had stopped, and the waggon had stopped too.  Its music changed 
as the horses came to a stand, and subsided to a gentle tinkling, 
except when a horse tossed his head or shook himself and sprinkled 
off a little shower of bell-ringing.

"Our postilion is looking after the waggoner," said Richard, "and 
the waggoner is coming back after us.  Good day, friend!"  The 
waggoner was at our coach-door.  "Why, here's an extraordinary 
thing!" added Richard, looking closely at the man.  "He has got 
your name, Ada, in his hat!"

He had all our names in his hat.  Tucked within the band were three 
small notes--one addressed to Ada, one to Richard, one to me.  
These the waggoner delivered to each of us respectively, reading 
the name aloud first.  In answer to Richard's inquiry from whom 
they came, he briefly answered, "Master, sir, if you please"; and 
putting on his hat again (which was like a soft bowl), cracked his 
whip, re-awakened his music, and went melodiously away.

"Is that Mr. Jarndyce's waggon?" said Richard, calling to our post-
boy.

"Yes, sir," he replied.  "Going to London."

We opened the notes.  Each was a counterpart of the other and 
contained these words in a solid, plain hand.


"I look forward, my dear, to our meeting easily and without 
constraint on either side.  I therefore have to propose that we 
meet as old friends and take the past for granted.  It will be a 
relief to you possibly, and to me certainly, and so my love to you.

John Jarndyce"


I had perhaps less reason to be surprised than either of my 
companions, having never yet enjoyed an opportunity of thanking one 
who had been my benefactor and sole earthly dependence through so 
many years.  I had not considered how I could thank him, my 
gratitude lying too deep in my heart for that; but I now began to 
consider how I could meet him without thanking him, and felt it 
would be very difficult indeed.

The notes revived in Richard and Ada a general impression that they 
both had, without quite knowing how they came by it, that their 
cousin Jarndyce could never bear acknowledgments for any kindness 
he performed and that sooner than receive any he would resort to 
the most singular expedients and evasions or would even run away.  
Ada dimly remembered to have heard her mother tell, when she was a 
very little child, that he had once done her an act of uncommon 
generosity and that on her going to his house to thank him, he 
happened to see her through a window coming to the door, and 
immediately escaped by the back gate, and was not heard of for 
three months.  This discourse led to a great deal more on the same 
theme, and indeed it lasted us all day, and we talked of scarcely 
anything else.  If we did by any chance diverge into another 
subject, we soon returned to this, and wondered what the house 
would be like, and when we should get there, and whether we should 
see Mr. Jarndyce as soon as we arrived or after a delay, and what 
he would say to us, and what we should say to him.  All of which we 
wondered about, over and over again.

The roads were very heavy for the horses, but the pathway was 
generally good, so we alighted and walked up all the hills, and 
liked it so well that we prolonged our walk on the level ground 
when we got to the top.  At Barnet there were other horses waiting 
for us, but as they had only just been fed, we had to wait for them 
too, and got a long fresh walk over a common and an old battle-
field before the carriage came up.  These delays so protracted the 
journey that the short day was spent and the long night had closed 
in before we came to St. Albans, near to which town Bleak House 
was, we knew.

By that time we were so anxious and nervous that even Richard 
confessed, as we rattled over the stones of the old street, to 
feeling an irrational desire to drive back again.  As to Ada and 
me, whom he had wrapped up with great care, the night being sharp 
and frosty, we trembled from head to foot.  When we turned out of 
the town, round a corner, and Richard told us that the post-boy, 
who had for a long time sympathized with our heightened 
expectation, was looking back and nodding, we both stood up in the 
carriage (Richard holding Ada lest she should be jolted down) and 
gazed round upon the open country and the starlight night for our 
destination.  There was a light sparkling on the top of a hill 
before us, and the driver, pointing to it with his whip and crying, 
"That's Bleak House!" put his horses into a canter and took us 
forward at such a rate, uphill though it was, that the wheels sent 
the road drift flying about our heads like spray from a water-mill.  
Presently we lost the light, presently saw it, presently lost it, 
presently saw it, and turned into an avenue of trees and cantered 
up towards where it was beaming brightly.  It was in a window of 
what seemed to be an old-fashioned house with three peaks in the 
roof in front and a circular sweep leading to the porch.  A bell 
was rung as we drew up, and amidst the sound of its deep voice in 
the still air, and the distant barking of some dogs, and a gush of 
light from the opened door, and the smoking and steaming of the 
heated horses, and the quickened beating of our own hearts, we 
alighted in no inconsiderable confusion.

"Ada, my love, Esther, my dear, you are welcome.  I rejoice to see 
you!  Rick, if I had a hand to spare at present, I would give it 
you!"

The gentleman who said these words in a clear, bright, hospitable 
voice had one of his arms round Ada's waist and the other round 
mine, and kissed us both in a fatherly way, and bore us across the 
hall into a ruddy little room, all in a glow with a blazing fire.  
Here he kissed us again, and opening his arms, made us sit down 
side by side on a sofa ready drawn out near the hearth.  I felt 
that if we had been at all demonstrative, he would have run away in 
a moment.

"Now, Rick!" said he.  "I have a hand at liberty.  A word in 
earnest is as good as a speech.  I am heartily glad to see you.  
You are at home.  Warm yourself!"

Richard shook him by both hands with an intuitive mixture of 
respect and frankness, and only saying (though with an earnestness 
that rather alarmed me, I was so afraid of Mr. Jarndyce's suddenly 
disappearing), "You are very kind, sir!  We are very much obliged 
to you!" laid aside his hat and coat and came up to the fire.

"And how did you like the ride?  And how did you like Mrs. Jellyby, 
my dear?" said Mr. Jarndyce to Ada.

While Ada was speaking to him in reply, I glanced (I need not say 
with how much interest) at his face.  It was a handsome, lively, 
quick face, full of change and motion; and his hair was a silvered 
iron-grey.  I took him to be nearer sixty than fifty, but he was 
upright, hearty, and robust.  From the moment of his first speaking 
to us his voice had connected itself with an association in my mind 
that I could not define; but now, all at once, a something sudden 
in his manner and a pleasant expression in his eyes recalled the 
gentleman in the stagecoach six years ago on the memorable day of 
my journey to Reading.  I was certain it was he.  I never was so 
frightened in my life as when I made the discovery, for he caught 
my glance, and appearing to read my thoughts, gave such a look at 
the door that I thought we had lost him.

However, I am happy to say he remained where he was, and asked me 
what I thought of Mrs. Jellyby.

"She exerts herself very much for Africa, sir," I said.

"Nobly!" returned Mr. Jarndyce.  "But you answer like Ada."  Whom I 
had not heard.  "You all think something else, I see."

"We rather thought," said I, glancing at Richard and Ada, who 
entreated me with their eyes to speak, "that perhaps she was a 
little unmindful of her home."

"Floored!" cried Mr. Jarndyce.

I was rather alarmed again.

"Well!  I want to know your real thoughts, my dear.  I may have 
sent you there on purpose."

"We thought that, perhaps," said I, hesitating, "it is right to 
begin with the obligations of home, sir; and that, perhaps, while 
those are overlooked and neglected, no other duties can possibly be 
substituted for them."

"The little Jellybys," said Richard, coming to my relief, "are 
really--I can't help expressing myself strongly, sir--in a devil of 
a state."

"She means well," said Mr. Jarndyce hastily.  "The wind's in the 
east."

"It was in the north, sir, as we came down," observed Richard.

"My dear Rick," said Mr. Jarndyce, poking the fire, "I'll take an 
oath it's either in the east or going to be.  I am always conscious 
of an uncomfortable sensation now and then when the wind is blowing 
in the east."

"Rheumatism, sir?" said Richard.

"I dare say it is, Rick.  I believe it is.  And so the little Jell
--I had my doubts about 'em--are in a--oh, Lord, yes, it's 
easterly!" said Mr. Jarndyce.

He had taken two or three undecided turns up and down while 
uttering these broken sentences, retaining the poker in one hand 
and rubbing his hair with the other, with a good-natured vexation 
at once so whimsical and so lovable that I am sure we were more 
delighted with him than we could possibly have expressed in any 
words.  He gave an arm to Ada and an arm to me, and bidding Richard 
bring a candle, was leading the way out when he suddenly turned us 
all back again.

"Those little Jellybys.  Couldn't you--didn't you--now, if it had 
rained sugar-plums, or three-cornered raspberry tarts, or anything 
of that sort!" said Mr. Jarndyce.

"Oh, cousin--" Ada hastily began.

"Good, my pretty pet.  I like cousin.  Cousin John, perhaps, is 
better."

"Then, cousin John--" Ada laughingly began again.

"Ha, ha!  Very good indeed!" said Mr. Jarndyce with great 
enjoyment.  "Sounds uncommonly natural.  Yes, my dear?"

"It did better than that.  It rained Esther."

"Aye?" said Mr. Jarndyce.  "What did Esther do?"

"Why, cousin John," said Ada, clasping her hands upon his arm and 
shaking her head at me across him--for I wanted her to be quiet--
"Esther was their friend directly.  Esther nursed them, coaxed them 
to sleep, washed and dressed them, told them stories, kept them 
quiet, bought them keepsakes"--My dear girl!  I had only gone out 
with Peepy after he was found and given him a little, tiny horse!--
"and, cousin John, she softened poor Caroline, the eldest one, so 
much and was so thoughtful for me and so amiable!  No, no, I won't 
be contradicted, Esther dear!  You know, you know, it's true!"

The warm-hearted darling leaned across her cousin John and kissed 
me, and then looking up in his face, boldly said, "At all events, 
cousin John, I WILL thank you for the companion you have given me."  
I felt as if she challenged him to run away.  But he didn't.

"Where did you say the wind was, Rick?" asked Mr. Jarndyce.

"In the north as we came down, sir."

"You are right.  There's no east in it.  A mistake of mine.  Come, 
girls, come and see your home!"

It was one of those delightfully irregular houses where you go up 
and down steps out of one room into another, and where you come 
upon more rooms when you think you have seen all there are, and 
where there is a bountiful provision of little halls and passages, 
and where you find still older cottage-rooms in unexpected places 
with lattice windows and green growth pressing through them.  Mine, 
which we entered first, was of this kind, with an up-and-down roof 
that had more corners in it than I ever counted afterwards and a 
chimney (there was a wood fire on the hearth) paved all around with 
pure white tiles, in every one of which a bright miniature of the 
fire was blazing.  Out of this room, you went down two steps into a 
charming little sitting-room looking down upon a flower-garden, 
which room was henceforth to belong to Ada and me.  Out of this you 
went up three steps into Ada's bedroom, which had a fine broad 
window commanding a beautiful view (we saw a great expanse of 
darkness lying underneath the stars), to which there was a hollow 
window-seat, in which, with a spring-lock, three dear Adas might 
have been lost at once.  Out of this room you passed into a little 
gallery, with which the other best rooms (only two) communicated, 
and so, by a little staircase of shallow steps with a number of 
corner stairs in it, considering its length, down into the hall.  
But if instead of going out at Ada's door you came back into my 
room, and went out at the door by which you had entered it, and 
turned up a few crooked steps that branched off in an unexpected 
manner from the stairs, you lost yourself in passages, with mangles 
in them, and three-cornered tables, and a native Hindu chair, which 
was also a sofa, a box, and a bedstead, and looked in every form 
something between a bamboo skeleton and a great bird-cage, and had 
been brought from India nobody knew by whom or when.  From these 
you came on Richard's room, which was part library, part sitting-
room, part bedroom, and seemed indeed a comfortable compound of 
many rooms.  Out of that you went straight, with a little interval 
of passage, to the plain room where Mr. Jarndyce slept, all the 
year round, with his window open, his bedstead without any 
furniture standing in the middle of the floor for more air, and his 
cold bath gaping for him in a smaller room adjoining.  Out of that 
you came into another passage, where there were back-stairs and 
where you could hear the horses being rubbed down outside the 
stable and being told to "Hold up" and "Get over," as they slipped 
about very much on the uneven stones.  Or you might, if you came 
out at another door (every room had at least two doors), go 
straight down to the hall again by half-a-dozen steps and a low 
archway, wondering how you got back there or had ever got out of 
it.

The furniture, old-fashioned rather than old, like the house, was 
as pleasantly irregular.  Ada's sleeping-room was all flowers--in 
chintz and paper, in velvet, in needlework, in the brocade of two 
stiff courtly chairs which stood, each attended by a little page of 
a stool for greater state, on either side of the fire-place.  Our 
sitting-room was green and had framed and glazed upon the walls 
numbers of surprising and surprised birds, staring out of pictures 
at a real trout in a case, as brown and shining as if it had been 
served with gravy; at the death of Captain Cook; and at the whole 
process of preparing tea in China, as depicted by Chinese artists.  
In my room there were oval engravings of the months--ladies 
haymaking in short waists and large hats tied under the chin, for 
June; smooth-legged noblemen pointing with cocked-hats to village 
steeples, for October.  Half-length portraits in crayons abounded 
all through the house, but were so dispersed that I found the 
brother of a youthful officer of mine in the china-closet and the 
grey old age of my pretty young bride, with a flower in her bodice, 
in the breakfast-room.  As substitutes, I had four angels, of Queen 
Anne's reign, taking a complacent gentleman to heaven, in festoons, 
with some difficulty; and a composition in needlework representing 
fruit, a kettle, and an alphabet.  All the movables, from the 
wardrobes to the chairs and tables, hangings, glasses, even to the 
pincushions and scent-bottles on the dressing-tables, displayed the 
same quaint variety.  They agreed in nothing but their perfect 
neatness, their display of the whitest linen, and their storing-up, 
wheresoever the existence of a drawer, small or large, rendered it 
possible, of quantities of rose-leaves and sweet lavender.  Such, 
with its illuminated windows, softened here and there by shadows of 
curtains, shining out upon the starlight night; with its light, and 
warmth, and comfort; with its hospitable jingle, at a distance, of 
preparations for dinner; with the face of its generous master 
brightening everything we saw; and just wind enough without to 
sound a low accompaniment to everything we heard, were our first 
impressions of Bleak House.

"I am glad you like it," said Mr. Jarndyce when he had brought us 
round again to Ada's sitting-room.  "It makes no pretensions, but 
it is a comfortable little place, I hope, and will be more so with 
such bright young looks in it.  You have barely half an hour before 
dinner.  There's no one here but the finest creature upon earth--a 
child."

"More children, Esther!" said Ada.

"I don't mean literally a child," pursued Mr. Jarndyce; "not a 
child in years.  He is grown up--he is at least as old as I am--but 
in simplicity, and freshness, and enthusiasm, and a fine guileless 
inaptitude for all worldly affairs, he is a perfect child."

We felt that he must be very interesting.

"He knows Mrs. Jellyby," said Mr. Jarndyce.  "He is a musical man, 
an amateur, but might have been a professional.  He is an artist 
too, an amateur, but might have been a professional.  He is a man 
of attainments and of captivating manners.  He has been unfortunate 
in his affairs, and unfortunate in his pursuits, and unfortunate in 
his family; but he don't care--he's a child!"

"Did you imply that he has children of his own, sir?" inquired 
Richard.

"Yes, Rick!  Half-a-dozen.  More!  Nearer a dozen, I should think.  
But he has never looked after them.  How could he?  He wanted 
somebody to look after HIM.  He is a child, you know!" said Mr. 
Jarndyce.

"And have the children looked after themselves at all, sir?" 
inquired Richard.

"Why, just as you may suppose," said Mr. Jarndyce, his countenance 
suddenly falling.  "It is said that the children of the very poor 
are not brought up, but dragged up.  Harold Skimpole's children 
have tumbled up somehow or other.  The wind's getting round again, 
I am afraid.  I feel it rather!"

Richard observed that the situation was exposed on a sharp night.

"It IS exposed," said Mr. Jarndyce.  "No doubt that's the cause.  
Bleak House has an exposed sound.  But you are coming my way.  Come 
along!"

Our luggage having arrived and being all at hand, I was dressed in 
a few minutes and engaged in putting my worldly goods away when a 
maid (not the one in attendance upon Ada, but another, whom I had 
not seen) brought a basket into my room with two bunches of keys in 
it, all labelled.

"For you, miss, if you please," said she.

"For me?" said I.

"The housekeeping keys, miss."

I showed my surprise, for she added with some little surprise on 
her own part, "I was told to bring them as soon as you was alone, 
miss.  Miss Summerson, if I don't deceive myself?"

"Yes," said I.  "That is my name."

"The large bunch is the housekeeping, and the little bunch is the 
cellars, miss.  Any time you was pleased to appoint tomorrow 
morning, I was to show you the presses and things they belong to."

I said I would be ready at half-past six, and after she was gone, 
stood looking at the basket, quite lost in the magnitude of my 
trust.  Ada found me thus and had such a delightful confidence in 
me when I showed her the keys and told her about them that it would 
have been insensibility and ingratitude not to feel encouraged.  I 
knew, to be sure, that it was the dear girl's kindness, but I liked 
to be so pleasantly cheated.

When we went downstairs, we were presented to Mr. Skimpole, who was 
standing before the fire telling Richard how fond he used to be, in 
his school-time, of football.  He was a little bright creature with 
a rather large head, but a delicate face and a sweet voice, and 
there was a perfect charm in him.  All he said was so free from 
effort and spontaneous and was said with such a captivating gaiety 
that it was fascinating to hear him talk.  Being of a more slender 
figure than Mr. Jarndyce and having a richer complexion, with 
browner hair, he looked younger.  Indeed, he had more the 
appearance in all respects of a damaged young man than a well-
preserved elderly one.  There was an easy negligence in his manner 
and even in his dress (his hair carelessly disposed, and his 
neckkerchief loose and flowing, as I have seen artists paint their 
own portraits) which I could not separate from the idea of a 
romantic youth who had undergone some unique process of 
depreciation.  It struck me as being not at all like the manner or 
appearance of a man who had advanced in life by the usual road of 
years, cares, and experiences.

I gathered from the conversation that Mr. Skimpole had been 
educated for the medical profession and had once lived, in his 
professional capacity, in the household of a German prince.  He 
told us, however, that as he had always been a mere child in point 
of weights and measures and had never known anything about them 
(except that they disgusted him), he had never been able to 
prescribe with the requisite accuracy of detail.  In fact, he said, 
he had no head for detail.  And he told us, with great humour, that 
when he was wanted to bleed the prince or physic any of his people, 
he was generally found lying on his back in bed, reading the 
newspapers or making fancy-sketches in pencil, and couldn't come.  
The prince, at last, objecting to this, "in which," said Mr. 
Skimpole, in the frankest manner, "he was perfectly right," the 
engagement terminated, and Mr. Skimpole having (as he added with 
delightful gaiety) "nothing to live upon but love, fell in love, 
and married, and surrounded himself with rosy cheeks."  His good 
friend Jarndyce and some other of his good friends then helped him, 
in quicker or slower succession, to several openings in life, but 
to no purpose, for he must confess to two of the oldest infirmities 
in the world: one was that he had no idea of time, the other that 
he had no idea of money.  In consequence of which he never kept an 
appointment, never could transact any business, and never knew the 
value of anything!  Well!  So he had got on in life, and here he 
was!  He was very fond of reading the papers, very fond of making 
fancy-sketches with a pencil, very fond of nature, very fond of 
art.  All he asked of society was to let him live.  THAT wasn't 
much.  His wants were few.  Give him the papers, conversation, 
music, mutton, coffee, landscape, fruit in the season, a few sheets 
of Bristol-board, and a little claret, and he asked no more.  He 
was a mere child in the world, but he didn't cry for the moon.  He 
said to the world, "Go your several ways in peace!  Wear red coats, 
blue coats, lawn sleeves; put pens behind your ears, wear aprons; 
go after glory, holiness, commerce, trade, any object you prefer; 
only--let Harold Skimpole live!"

All this and a great deal more he told us, not only with the utmost 
brilliancy and enjoyment, but with a certain vivacious candour--
speaking of himself as if he were not at all his own affair, as if 
Skimpole were a third person, as if he knew that Skimpole had his 
singularities but still had his claims too, which were the general 
business of the community and must not be slighted.  He was quite 
enchanting.  If I felt at all confused at that early time in 
endeavouring to reconcile anything he said with anything I had 
thought about the duties and accountabilities of life (which I am 
far from sure of), I was confused by not exactly understanding why 
he was free of them.  That he WAS free of them, I scarcely doubted; 
he was so very clear about it himself.

"I covet nothing," said Mr. Skimpole in the same light way.  
"Possession is nothing to me.  Here is my friend Jarndyce's 
excellent house.  I feel obliged to him for possessing it.  I can 
sketch it and alter it.  I can set it to music.  When I am here, I 
have sufficient possession of it and have neither trouble, cost, 
nor responsibility.  My steward's name, in short, is Jarndyce, and 
he can't cheat me.  We have been mentioning Mrs. Jellyby.  There is 
a bright-eyed woman, of a strong will and immense power of business 
detail, who throws herself into objects with surprising ardour!  I 
don't regret that I have not a strong will and an immense power of 
business detail to throw myself into objects with surprising 
ardour.  I can admire her without envy.  I can sympathize with the 
objects.  I can dream of them.  I can lie down on the grass--in 
fine weather--and float along an African river, embracing all the 
natives I meet, as sensible of the deep silence and sketching the 
dense overhanging tropical growth as accurately as if I were there.  
I don't know that it's of any direct use my doing so, but it's all 
I can do, and I do it thoroughly.  Then, for heaven's sake, having 
Harold Skimpole, a confiding child, petitioning you, the world, an 
agglomeration of practical people of business habits, to let him 
live and admire the human family, do it somehow or other, like good 
souls, and suffer him to ride his rocking-horse!"

It was plain enough that Mr. Jarndyce had not been neglectful of 
the adjuration.  Mr. Skimpole's general position there would have 
rendered it so without the addition of what he presently said.

"It's only you, the generous creatures, whom I envy," said Mr. 
Skimpole, addressing us, his new friends, in an impersonal manner.  
"I envy you your power of doing what you do.  It is what I should 
revel in myself.  I don't feel any vulgar gratitude to you.  I 
almost feel as if YOU ought to be grateful to ME for giving you the 
opportunity of enjoying the luxury of generosity.  I know you like 
it.  For anything I can tell, I may have come into the world 
expressly for the purpose of increasing your stock of happiness.  I 
may have been born to be a benefactor to you by sometimes giving 
you an opportunity of assisting me in my little perplexities.  Why 
should I regret my incapacity for details and worldly affairs when 
it leads to such pleasant consequences?  I don't regret it 
therefore."

Of all his playful speeches (playful, yet always fully meaning what 
they expressed) none seemed to be more to the taste of Mr. Jarndyce 
than this.  I had often new temptations, afterwards, to wonder 
whether it was really singular, or only singular to me, that he, 
who was probably the most grateful of mankind upon the least 
occasion, should so desire to escape the gratitude of others.

We were all enchanted.  I felt it a merited tribute to the engaging 
qualities of Ada and Richard that Mr. Skimpole, seeing them for the 
first time, should he so unreserved and should lay himself out to 
be so exquisitely agreeable.  They (and especially Richard) were 
naturally pleased; for similar reasons, and considered it no common 
privilege to be so freely confided in by such an attractive man.  
The more we listened, the more gaily Mr. Skimpole talked.  And what 
with his fine hilarious manner and his engaging candour and his 
genial way of lightly tossing his own weaknesses about, as if he 
had said, "I am a child, you know!  You are designing people 
compared with me" (he really made me consider myself in that light) 
"but I am gay and innocent; forget your worldly arts and play with 
me!" the effect was absolutely dazzling.

He was so full of feeling too and had such a delicate sentiment for 
what was beautiful or tender that he could have won a heart by that 
alone.  In the evening, when I was preparing to make tea and Ada 
was touching the piano in the adjoining room and softly humming a 
tune to her cousin Richard, which they had happened to mention, he 
came and sat down on the sofa near me and so spoke of Ada that I 
almost loved him.

"She is like the morning," he said.  "With that golden hair, those 
blue eyes, and that fresh bloom on her cheek, she is like the 
summer morning.  The birds here will mistake her for it.  We will 
not call such a lovely young creature as that, who is a joy to all 
mankind, an orphan.  She is the child of the universe."

Mr. Jarndyce, I found, was standing near us with his hands behind 
him and an attentive smile upon his face.

"The universe," he observed, "makes rather an indifferent parent, I 
am afraid."

"Oh! I don't know!" cried Mr. Skimpole buoyantly.

"I think I do know," said Mr. Jarndyce.

"Well!" cried Mr. Skimpole.  "You know the world (which in your 
sense is the universe), and I know nothing of it, so you shall have 
your way.  But if I had mine," glancing at the cousins, "there 
should be no brambles of sordid realities in such a path as that.  
It should be strewn with roses; it should lie through bowers, where 
there was no spring, autumn, nor winter, but perpetual summer.  Age 
or change should never wither it.  The base word money should never 
be breathed near it!"

Mr. Jarndyce patted him on the head with a smile, as if he had been 
really a child, and passing a step or two on, and stopping a 
moment, glanced at the young cousins.  His look was thoughtful, but 
had a benignant expression in it which I often (how often!) saw 
again, which has long been engraven on my heart.  The room in which 
they were, communicating with that in which he stood, was only 
lighted by the fire.  Ada sat at the piano; Richard stood beside 
her, bending down.  Upon the wall, their shadows blended together, 
surrounded by strange forms, not without a ghostly motion caught 
from the unsteady fire, though reflecting from motionless objects.  
Ada touched the notes so softly and sang so low that the wind, 
sighing away to the distant hills, was as audible as the music.  
The mystery of the future and the little clue afforded to it by the 
voice of the present seemed expressed in the whole picture.

But it is not to recall this fancy, well as I remember it, that I 
recall the scene.  First, I was not quite unconscious of the 
contrast in respect of meaning and intention between the silent 
look directed that way and the flow of words that had preceded it.  
Secondly, though Mr. Jarndyce's glance as he withdrew it rested for 
but a moment on me, I felt as if in that moment he confided to me--
and knew that he confided to me and that I received the confidence
--his hope that Ada and Richard might one day enter on a dearer 
relationship.

Mr. Skimpole could play on the piano and the violoncello, and he 
was a composer--had composed half an opera once, but got tired of 
it--and played what he composed with taste.  After tea we had quite 
a little concert, in which Richard--who was enthralled by Ada's 
singing and told me that she seemed to know all the songs that ever 
were written--and Mr. Jarndyce, and I were the audience.  After a 
little while I missed first Mr. Skimpole and afterwards Richard, 
and while I was thinking how could Richard stay away so long and 
lose so much, the maid who had given me the keys looked in at the 
door, saying, "If you please, miss, could you spare a minute?"

When I was shut out with her in the hall, she said, holding up her 
hands, "Oh, if you please, miss, Mr. Carstone says would you come 
upstairs to Mr. Skimpole's room.  He has been took, miss!"

"Took?" said I. 

"Took, miss.  Sudden," said the maid.

I was apprehensive that his illness might be of a dangerous kind, 
but of course I begged her to be quiet and not disturb any one and 
collected myself, as I followed her quickly upstairs, sufficiently 
to consider what were the best remedies to be applied if it should 
prove to be a fit.  She threw open a door and I went into a 
chamber, where, to my unspeakable surprise, instead of finding Mr. 
Skimpole stretched upon the bed or prostrate on the floor, I found 
him standing before the fire smiling at Richard, while Richard, 
with a face of great embarrassment, looked at a person on the sofa, 
in a white great-coat, with smooth hair upon his head and not much 
of it, which he was wiping smoother and making less of with a 
pocket-handkerchief.

"Miss Summerson," said Richard hurriedly, "I am glad you are come.  
You will be able to advise us.  Our friend Mr. Skimpole--don't be 
alarmed!--is arrested for debt."

"And really, my dear Miss Summerson," said Mr. Skimpole with his 
agreeable candour, "I never was in a situation in which that 
excellent sense and quiet habit of method and usefulness, which 
anybody must observe in you who has the happiness of being a 
quarter of an hour in your society, was more needed."

The person on the sofa, who appeared to have a cold in his head, 
gave such a very loud snort that he startled me.

"Are you arrested for much, sir?" I inquired of Mr. Skimpole.

"My dear Miss Summerson," said he, shaking his head pleasantly, "I 
don't know.  Some pounds, odd shillings, and halfpence, I think, 
were mentioned."

"It's twenty-four pound, sixteen, and sevenpence ha'penny," 
observed the stranger.  "That's wot it is."

"And it sounds--somehow it sounds," said Mr. Skimpole, "like a 
small sum?"

The strange man said nothing but made another snort.  It was such a 
powerful one that it seemed quite to lift him out of his seat.

"Mr. Skimpole," said Richard to me, "has a delicacy in applying to 
my cousin Jarndyce because he has lately--I think, sir, I 
understood you that you had lately--"

"Oh, yes!" returned Mr. Skimpole, smiling.  "Though I forgot how 
much it was and when it was.  Jarndyce would readily do it again, 
but I have the epicure-like feeling that I would prefer a novelty 
in help, that I would rather," and he looked at Richard and me, 
"develop generosity in a new soil and in a new form of flower."

"What do you think will be best, Miss Summerson?" said Richard, 
aside.

I ventured to inquire, generally, before replying, what would 
happen if the money were not produced.

"Jail," said the strange man, coolly putting his handkerchief into 
his hat, which was on the floor at his feet.  "Or Coavinses."

"May I ask, sir, what is--"

"Coavinses?" said the strange man.  "A 'ouse."

Richard and I looked at one another again.  It was a most singular 
thing that the arrest was our embarrassment and not Mr. Skimpole's.  
He observed us with a genial interest, but there seemed, if I may 
venture on such a contradiction, nothing selfish in it.  He had 
entirely washed his hands of the difficulty, and it had become 
ours.

"I thought," he suggested, as if good-naturedly to help us out, 
"that being parties in a Chancery suit concerning (as people say) a 
large amount of property, Mr. Richard or his beautiful cousin, or 
both, could sign something, or make over something, or give some 
sort of undertaking, or pledge, or bond?  I don't know what the 
business name of it may be, but I suppose there is some instrument 
within their power that would settle this?"

"Not a bit on it," said the strange man.

"Really?" returned Mr. Skimpole.  "That seems odd, now, to one who 
is no judge of these things!"

"Odd or even," said the stranger gruffly, "I tell you, not a bit on 
it!"

"Keep your temper, my good fellow, keep your temper!" Mr. Skimpole 
gently reasoned with him as he made a little drawing of his head on 
the fly-leaf of a book.  "Don't be ruffled by your occupation.  We 
can separate you from your office; we can separate the individual 
from the pursuit.  We are not so prejudiced as to suppose that in 
private life you are otherwise than a very estimable man, with a 
great deal of poetry in your nature, of which you may not be 
conscious.

The stranger only answered with another violent snort, whether in 
acceptance of the poetry-tribute or in disdainful rejection of it, 
he did not express to me.

"Now, my dear Miss Summerson, and my dear Mr. Richard," said Mr. 
Skimpole gaily, innocently, and confidingly as he looked at his 
drawing with his head on one side, "here you see me utterly 
incapable of helping myself, and entirely in your hands!  I only 
ask to be free.  The butterflies are free.  Mankind will surely not 
deny to Harold Skimpole what it concedes to the butterflies!"

"My dear Miss Summerson," said Richard in a whisper, "I have ten 
pounds that I received from Mr. Kenge.  I must try what that will 
do."

I possessed fifteen pounds, odd shillings, which I had saved from 
my quarterly allowance during several years.  I had always thought 
that some accident might happen which would throw me suddenly, 
without any relation or any property, on the world and had always 
tried to keep some little money by me that I might not be quite 
penniless.  I told Richard of my having this little store and 
having no present need of it, and I asked him delicately to inform 
Mr. Skimpole, while I should be gone to fetch it, that we would 
have the pleasure of paying his debt.

When I came back, Mr. Skimpole kissed my hand and seemed quite 
touched.  Not on his own account (I was again aware of that 
perplexing and extraordinary contradiction), but on ours, as if 
personal considerations were impossible with him and the 
contemplation of our happiness alone affected him.  Richard, 
begging me, for the greater grace of the transaction, as he said, 
to settle with Coavinses (as Mr. Skimpole now jocularly called 
him), I counted out the money and received the necessary 
acknowledgment.  This, too, delighted Mr. Skimpole.

His compliments were so delicately administered that I blushed less 
than I might have done and settled with the stranger in the white 
coat without making any mistakes.  He put the money in his pocket 
and shortly said, "Well, then, I'll wish you a good evening, miss.

"My friend," said Mr. Skimpole, standing with his back to the fire 
after giving up the sketch when it was half finished, "I should 
like to ask you something, without offence."

I think the reply was, "Cut away, then!"

"Did you know this morning, now, that you were coming out on this 
errand?" said Mr. Skimpole.

"Know'd it yes'day aft'noon at tea-time," said Coavinses.

"It didn't affect your appetite?  Didn't make you at all uneasy?"

"Not a hit," said Coavinses.  "I know'd if you wos missed to-day, 
you wouldn't be missed to-morrow.  A day makes no such odds."

"But when you came down here," proceeded Mr. Skimpole, "it was a 
fine day.  The sun was shining, the wind was blowing, the lights 
and shadows were passing across the fields, the birds were 
singing."

"Nobody said they warn't, in MY hearing," returned Coavinses.

"No," observed Mr. Skimpole.  "But what did you think upon the 
road?"

"Wot do you mean?" growled Coavinses with an appearance of strong 
resentment.  "Think!  I've got enough to do, and little enough to 
get for it without thinking.  Thinking!" (with profound contempt).

"Then you didn't think, at all events," proceeded Mr. Skimpole, "to 
this effect: 'Harold Skimpole loves to see the sun shine, loves to 
hear the wind blow, loves to watch the changing lights and shadows, 
loves to hear the birds, those choristers in Nature's great 
cathedral.  And does it seem to me that I am about to deprive 
Harold Skimpole of his share in such possessions, which are his 
only birthright!'  You thought nothing to that effect?"

"I--certainly--did--NOT," said Coavinses, whose doggedness in 
utterly renouncing the idea was of that intense kind that he could 
only give adequate expression to it by putting a long interval 
between each word, and accompanying the last with a jerk that might 
have dislocated his neck.

"Very odd and very curious, the mental process is, in you men of 
business!" said Mr. Skimpole thoughtfully.  "Thank you, my friend.  
Good night."

As our absence had been long enough already to seem strange 
downstairs, I returned at once and found Ada sitting at work by the 
fireside talking to her cousin John.  Mr. Skimpole presently 
appeared, and Richard shortly after him.  I was sufficiently 
engaged during the remainder of the evening in taking my first 
lesson in backgammon from Mr. Jarndyce, who was very fond of the 
game and from whom I wished of course to learn it as quickly as I 
could in order that I might be of the very small use of being able 
to play when he had no better adversary.  But I thought, 
occasionally, when Mr. Skimpole played some fragments of his own 
compositions or when, both at the piano and the violoncello, and at 
our table, he preserved with an absence of all effort his 
delightful spirits and his easy flow of conversation, that Richard 
and I seemed to retain the transferred impression of having been 
arrested since dinner and that it was very curious altogether.

It was late before we separated, for when Ada was going at eleven 
o'clock, Mr. Skimpole went to the piano and rattled hilariously 
that the best of all ways to lengthen our days was to steal a few 
hours from night, my dear!  It was past twelve before he took his 
candle and his radiant face out of the room, and I think he might 
have kept us there, if he had seen fit, until daybreak.  Ada and 
Richard were lingering for a few moments by the fire, wondering 
whether Mrs. Jellyby had yet finished her dictation for the day, 
when Mr. Jarndyce, who had been out of the room, returned.

"Oh, dear me, what's this, what's this!" he said, rubbing his head 
and walking about with his good-humoured vexation.  "What's this 
they tell me?  Rick, my boy, Esther, my dear, what have you been 
doing?  Why did you do it?  How could you do it?  How much apiece 
was it?  The wind's round again.  I feel it all over me!"

We neither of us quite knew what to answer.

"Come, Rick, come!  I must settle this before I sleep.  How much 
are you out of pocket?  You two made the money up, you know!  Why 
did you?  How could you?  Oh, Lord, yes, it's due east--must be!"

"Really, sir," said Richard, "I don't think it would be honourable 
in me to tell you.  Mr. Skimpole relied upon us--"

"Lord bless you, my dear boy!  He relies upon everybody!" said Mr. 
Jarndyce, giving his head a great rub and stopping short.

"Indeed, sir?"

"Everybody!  And he'll be in the same scrape again next week!" said 
Mr. Jarndyce, walking again at a great pace, with a candle in his 
hand that had gone out.  "He's always in the same scrape.  He was 
born in the same scrape.  I verily believe that the announcement in 
the newspapers when his mother was confined was 'On Tuesday last, 
at her residence in Botheration Buildings, Mrs. Skimpole of a son 
in difficulties.'"

Richard laughed heartily but added, "Still, sir, I don't want to 
shake his confidence or to break his confidence, and if I submit to 
your better knowledge again, that I ought to keep his secret, I 
hope you will consider before you press me any more.  Of course, if 
you do press me, sir, I shall know I am wrong and will tell you."

"Well!" cried Mr. Jarndyce, stopping again, and making several 
absent endeavours to put his candlestick in his pocket.  "I--here!  
Take it away, my dear.  I don't know what I am about with it; it's 
all the wind--invariably has that effect--I won't press you, Rick; 
you may be right.  But really--to get hold of you and Esther--and 
to squeeze you like a couple of tender young Saint Michael's 
oranges!  It'll blow a gale in the course of the night!"

He was now alternately putting his hands into his pockets as if he 
were going to keep them there a long time, and taking them out 
again and vehemently rubbing them all over his head.

I ventured to take this opportunity of hinting that Mr. Skimpole, 
being in all such matters quite a child--

"Eh, my dear?" said Mr. Jarndyce, catching at the word.

Being quite a child, sir," said I, "and so different from other 
people--"

"You are right!" said Mr. Jarndyce, brightening.  "Your woman's wit 
hits the mark.  He is a child--an absolute child.  I told you he 
was a child, you know, when I first mentioned him."

Certainly! Certainly! we said.

"And he IS a child.  Now, isn't he?" asked Mr. Jarndyce, 
brightening more and more.

He was indeed, we said.

"When you come to think of it, it's the height of childishness in 
you--I mean me--" said Mr. Jarodyce, "to regard him for a moment as 
a man.  You can't make HIM responsible.  The idea of Harold 
Skimpole with designs or plans, or knowledge of consequences!  Ha, 
ha, ha!"

It was so delicious to see the clouds about his bright face 
clearing, and to see him so heartily pleased, and to know, as it 
was impossible not to know, that the source of his pleasure was the 
goodness which was tortured by condemning, or mistrusting, or 
secretly accusing any one, that I saw the tears in Ada's eyes, 
while she echoed his laugh, and felt them in my own.

"Why, what a cod's head and shoulders I am," said Mr. Jarndyce, "to 
require reminding of it!  The whole business shows the child from 
beginning to end.  Nobody but a child would have thought of 
singling YOU two out for parties in the affair!  Nobody but a child 
would have thought of YOUR having the money!  If it had been a 
thousand pounds, it would have been just the same!" said Mr. 
Jarndyce with his whole face in a glow.

We all confirmed it from our night's experience.

"To be sure, to be sure!" said Mr. Jarndyce.  "However, Rick, 
Esther, and you too, Ada, for I don't know that even your little 
purse is safe from his inexperience--I must have a promise all 
round that nothing of this sort shall ever be done any more.  No 
advances!  Not even sixpences."

We all promised faithfully, Richard with a merry glance at me 
touching his pocket as if to remind me that there was no danger of 
OUR transgressing.

"As to Skimpole," said Mr. Jarndyce, "a habitable doll's house with 
good board and a few tin people to get into debt with and borrow 
money of would set the boy up in life.  He is in a child's sleep by 
this time, I suppose; it's time I should take my craftier head to 
my more worldly pillow.  Good night, my dears.  God bless you!"

He peeped in again, with a smiling face, before we had lighted our 
candles, and said, "Oh! I have been looking at the weather-cock.  I 
find it was a false alarm about the wind.  It's in the south!" And 
went away singing to himself.

Ada and I agreed, as we talked together for a little while 
upstairs, that this caprice about the wind was a fiction and that 
he used the pretence to account for any disappointment he could not 
conceal, rather than he would blame the real cause of it or 
disparage or depreciate any one.  We thought this very 
characteristic of his eccentric gentleness and of the difference 
between him and those petulant people who make the weather and the 
winds (particularly that unlucky wind which he had chosen for such 
a different purpose) the stalking-horses of their splenetic and 
gloomy humours.

Indeed, so much affection for him had been added in this one 
evening to my gratitude that I hoped I already began to understand 
him through that mingled feeling.  Any seeming inconsistencies in 
Mr. Skimpole or in Mrs. Jellyby I could not expect to be able to 
reconcile, having so little experience or practical knowledge.  
Neither did I try, for my thoughts were busy when I was alone, with 
Ada and Richard and with the confidence I had seemed to receive 
concerning them.  My fancy, made a little wild by the wind perhaps, 
would not consent to be all unselfish, either, though I would have 
persuaded it to be so if I could.  It wandered back to my 
godmother's house and came along the intervening track, raising up 
shadowy speculations which had sometimes trembled there in the dark 
as to what knowledge Mr. Jarndyce had of my earliest history--even 
as to the possibility of his being my father, though that idle 
dream was quite gone now.

It was all gone now, I remembered, getting up from the fire.  It was 
not for me to muse over bygones, but to act with a cheerful spirit 
and a grateful heart.  So I said to myself, "Esther, Esther, Esther!  
Duty, my dear!" and gave my little basket of housekeeping keys such 
a shake that they sounded like little bells and rang me hopefully to 
bed.



CHAPTER VII

The Ghost's Walk


While Esther sleeps, and while Esther wakes, it is still wet weather 
down at the place in Lincolnshire.  The rain is ever falling--drip, 
drip, drip--by day and night upon the broad flagged terrace-
pavement, the Ghost's Walk.  The weather is so very bad down in 
Lincolnshire that the liveliest imagination can scarcely apprehend 
its ever being fine again.  Not that there is any superabundant life 
of imagination on the spot, for Sir Leicester is not here (and, 
truly, even if he were, would not do much for it in that 
particular), but is in Paris with my Lady; and solitude, with dusky 
wings, sits brooding upon Chesney Wold.

There may be some motions of fancy among the lower animals at 
Chesney Wold.  The horses in the stables--the long stables in a 
barren, red-brick court-yard, where there is a great bell in a 
turret, and a clock with a large face, which the pigeons who live 
near it and who love to perch upon its shoulders seem to be always 
consulting--THEY may contemplate some mental pictures of fine 
weather on occasions, and may be better artists at them than the 
grooms.  The old roan, so famous for cross-country work, turning his 
large eyeball to the grated window near his rack, may remember the 
fresh leaves that glisten there at other times and the scents that 
stream in, and may have a fine run with the hounds, while the human 
helper, clearing out the next stall, never stirs beyond his 
pitchfork and birch-broom.  The grey, whose place is opposite the 
door and who with an impatient rattle of his halter pricks his ears 
and turns his head so wistfully when it is opened, and to whom the 
opener says, "'Woa grey, then, steady!  Noabody wants you to-day!" 
may know it quite as well as the man.  The whole seemingly 
monotonous and uncompanionable half-dozen, stabled together, may 
pass the long wet hours when the door is shut in livelier 
communication than is held in the servants' hall or at the Dedlock 
Arms, or may even beguile the time by improving (perhaps corrupting) 
the pony in the loose-box in the corner.

So the mastiff, dozing in his kennel in the court-yard with his 
large head on his paws, may think of the hot sunshine when the 
shadows of the stable-buildings tire his patience out by changing 
and leave him at one time of the day no broader refuge than the 
shadow of his own house, where he sits on end, panting and growling 
short, and very much wanting something to worry besides himself and 
his chain.  So now, half-waking and all-winking, he may recall the 
house full of company, the coach-houses full of vehicles, the 
stables fall of horses, and the out-buildings full of attendants 
upon horses, until he is undecided about the present and comes forth 
to see how it is.  Then, with that impatient shake of himself, he 
may growl in the spirit, "Rain, rain, rain!  Nothing but rain--and 
no family here!" as he goes in again and lies down with a gloomy 
yawn.

So with the dogs in the kennel-buildings across the park, who have 
their resfless fits and whose doleful voices when the wind has been 
very obstinate have even made it known in the house itself--
upstairs, downstairs, and in my Lady's chamber.  They may hunt the 
whole country-side, while the raindrops are pattering round their 
inactivity.  So the rabbits with their self-betraying tails, 
frisking in and out of holes at roots of trees, may be lively with 
ideas of the breezy days when their ears are blown about or of those 
seasons of interest when there are sweet young plants to gnaw.  The 
turkey in the poultry-yard, always troubled with a class-grievance 
(probably Christmas), may be reminiscent of that summer morning 
wrongfully taken from him when he got into the lane among the felled 
trees, where there was a barn and barley.  The discontented goose, 
who stoops to pass under the old gateway, twenty feet high, may 
gabble out, if we only knew it, a waddling preference for weather 
when the gateway casts its shadow on the ground.

Be this as it may, there is not much fancy otherwise stirring at 
Chesney Wold.  If there be a little at any odd moment, it goes, 
like a little noise in that old echoing place, a long way and 
usually leads off to ghosts and mystery.

It has rained so hard and rained so long down in Lincolnshire that 
Mrs. Rouncewell, the old housekeeper at Chesney Wold, has several 
times taken off her spectacles and cleaned them to make certain 
that the drops were not upon the glasses.  Mrs. Rouncewell might 
have been sufficiently assured by hearing the rain, but that she is 
rather deaf, which nothing will induce her to believe.  She is a 
fine old lady, handsome, stately, wonderfully neat, and has such a 
back and such a stomacher that if her stays should turn out when 
she dies to have been a broad old-fashioned family fire-grate, 
nobody who knows her would have cause to be surprised.  Weather 
affects Mrs. Rouncewell little.  The house is there in all 
weathers, and the house, as she expresses it, "is what she looks 
at."  She sits in her room (in a side passage on the ground floor, 
with an arched window commanding a smooth quadrangle, adorned at 
regular intervals with smooth round trees and smooth round blocks 
of stone, as if the trees were going to play at bowls with the 
stones), and the whole house reposes on her mind.  She can open it 
on occasion and be busy and fluttered, but it is shut up now and 
lies on the breadth of Mrs. Rouncewell's iron-bound bosom in a 
majestic sleep.

It is the next difficult thing to an impossibility to imagine 
Chesney Wold without Mrs. Rouncewell, but she has only been here 
fifty years.  Ask her how long, this rainy day, and she shall 
answer "fifty year, three months, and a fortnight, by the blessing 
of heaven, if I live till Tuesday."  Mr. Rouncewell died some time 
before the decease of the pretty fashion of pig-tails, and modestly 
hid his own (if he took it with him) in a corner of the churchyard 
in the park near the mouldy porch.  He was born in the market-town, 
and so was his young widow.  Her progress in the family began in 
the time of the last Sir Leicester and originated in the still-room.

The present representative of the Dedlocks is an excellent master.  
He supposes all his dependents to be utterly bereft of individual 
characters, intentions, or opinions, and is persuaded that he was 
born to supersede the necessity of their having any.  If he were to 
make a discovery to the contrary, he would be simply stunned--would 
never recover himself, most likely, except to gasp and die.  But he 
is an excellent master still, holding it a part of his state to be 
so.  He has a great liking for Mrs. Rouncewell; he says she is a 
most respectable, creditable woman.  He always shakes hands with 
her when he comes down to Chesney Wold and when he goes away; and 
if he were very ill, or if he were knocked down by accident, or run 
over, or placed in any situation expressive of a Dedlock at a 
disadvantage, he would say if he could speak, "Leave me, and send 
Mrs. Rouncewell here!" feeling his dignity, at such a pass, safer 
with her than with anybody else.

Mrs. Rouncewell has known trouble.  She has had two sons, of whom 
the younger ran wild, and went for a soldier, and never came back.  
Even to this hour, Mrs. Rouncewell's calm hands lose their 
composure when she speaks of him, and unfolding themselves from her 
stomacher, hover about her in an agitated manner as she says what a 
likely lad, what a fine lad, what a gay, good-humoured, clever lad 
he was!  Her second son would have been provided for at Chesney 
Wold and would have been made steward in due season, but he took, 
when he was a schoolboy, to constructing steam-engines out of 
saucepans and setting birds to draw their own water with the least 
possible amount of labour, so assisting them with artful 
contrivance of hydraulic pressure that a thirsty canary had only, 
in a literal sense, to put his shoulder to the wheel and the job 
was done.  This propensity gave Mrs. Rouncewell great uneasiness.  
She felt it with a mother's anguish to be a move in the Wat Tyler 
direction, well knowing that Sir Leicester had that general 
impression of an aptitude for any art to which smoke and a tall 
chimney might be considered essential.  But the doomed young rebel 
(otherwise a mild youth, and very persevering), showing no sign of 
grace as he got older but, on the contrary, constructing a model of 
a power-loom, she was fain, with many tears, to mention his 
backslidings to the baronet.  "Mrs. Rouncewell," said Sir 
Leicester, "I can never consent to argue, as you know, with any one 
on any subject.  You had better get rid of your boy; you had better 
get him into some Works.  The iron country farther north is, I 
suppose, the congenial direction for a boy with these tendencies."  
Farther north he went, and farther north he grew up; and if Sir 
Leicester Dedlock ever saw him when he came to Chesney Wold to 
visit his mother, or ever thought of him afterwards, it is certain 
that he only regarded him as one of a body of some odd thousand 
conspirators, swarthy and grim, who were in the habit of turning 
out by torchlight two or three nights in the week for unlawful 
purposes.

Nevertheless, Mrs. Rouncewell's son has, in the course of nature 
and art, grown up, and established himself, and married, and called 
unto him Mrs. Rouncewell's grandson, who, being out of his 
apprenticeship, and home from a journey in far countries, whither 
he was sent to enlarge his knowledge and complete his preparations 
for the venture of this life, stands leaning against the chimney-
piece this very day in Mrs. Rouncewell's room at Chesney Wold.

"And, again and again, I am glad to see you, Watt!  And, once 
again, I am glad to see you, Watt!" says Mrs. Rouncewell.  "You are 
a fine young fellow.  You are like your poor uncle George.  Ah!"  
Mrs. Rouncewell's hands unquiet, as usual, on this reference.

"They say I am like my father, grandmother."

"Like him, also, my dear--but most like your poor uncle George!  
And your dear father."  Mrs. Rouncewell folds her hands again.  "He 
is well?"

"Thriving, grandmother, in every way."

"I am thankful!"  Mrs. Rouncewell is fond of her son but has a 
plaintive feeling towards him, much as if he were a very honourable 
soldier who had gone over to the enemy.

"He is quite happy?" says she.

"Quite."

"I am thankful!  So he has brought you up to follow in his ways and 
has sent you into foreign countries and the like?  Well, he knows 
best.  There may be a world beyond Chesney Wold that I don't 
understand.  Though I am not young, either.  And I have seen a 
quantity of good company too!"

"Grandmother," says the young man, changing the subject, "what a 
very pretty girl that was I found with you just now.  You called 
her Rosa?"

"Yes, child.  She is daughter of a widow in the village.  Maids are 
so hard to teach, now-a-days, that I have put her about me young.  
She's an apt scholar and will do well.  She shows the house 
already, very pretty.  She lives with me at my table here."

"I hope I have not driven her away?"

"She supposes we have family affairs to speak about, I dare say.  
She is very modest.  It is a fine quality in a young woman.  And 
scarcer," says Mrs. Rouncewell, expanding her stomacher to its 
utmost limits, "than it formerly was!"

The young man inclines his head in acknowledgment of the precepts 
of experience.  Mrs. Rouncewell listens.

"Wheels!" says she.  They have long been audible to the younger 
ears of her companion.  "What wheels on such a day as this, for 
gracious sake?"

After a short interval, a tap at the door.  "Come in!"  A dark-
eyed, dark-haired, shy, village beauty comes in--so fresh in her 
rosy and yet delicate bloom that the drops of rain which have 
beaten on her hair look like the dew upon a flower fresh gathered.

"What company is this, Rosa?" says Mrs. Rouncewell.

"It's two young men in a gig, ma'am, who want to see the house--
yes, and if you please, I told them so!" in quick reply to a 
gesture of dissent from the housekeeper.  "I went to the hall-door 
and told them it was the wrong day and the wrong hour, but the 
young man who was driving took off his hat in the wet and begged me 
to bring this card to you."

"Read it, my dear Watt," says the housekeeper.

Rosa is so shy as she gives it to him that they drop it between 
them and almost knock their foreheads together as they pick it up.  
Rosa is shyer than before.

"Mr. Guppy" is all the information the card yields.

"Guppy!" repeats Mrs. Rouncewell, "MR. Guppy!  Nonsense, I never 
heard of him!"

"If you please, he told ME that!" says Rosa.  "But he said that he 
and the other young gentleman came from London only last night by 
the mail, on business at the magistrates' meeting, ten miles off, 
this morning, and that as their business was soon over, and they 
had heard a great deal said of Chesney Wold, and really didn't know 
what to do with themselves, they had come through the wet to see 
it.  They are lawyers.  He says he is not in Mr. Tulkinghorn's 
office, but he is sure he may make use of Mr. Tulkinghorn's name if 
necessary."  Finding, now she leaves off, that she has been making 
quite a long speech, Rosa is shyer than ever.

Now, Mr. Tulkinghorn is, in a manner, part and parcel of the place, 
and besides, is supposed to have made Mrs. Rouncewell's will.  The 
old lady relaxes, consents to the admission of the visitors as a 
favour, and dismisses Rosa.  The grandson, however, being smitten 
by a sudden wish to see the house himself, proposes to join the 
party.  The grandmother, who is pleased that he should have that 
interest, accompanies him--though to do him justice, he is 
exceedingly unwilling to trouble her.

"Much obliged to you, ma'am!" says Mr. Guppy, divesting himself of 
his wet dreadnought in the hall.  "Us London lawyers don't often 
get an out, and when we do, we like to make the most of it, you 
know."

The old housekeeper, with a gracious severity of deportment, waves 
her hand towards the great staircase.  Mr. Guppy and his friend 
follow Rosa; Mrs. Rouncewell and her grandson follow them; a young 
gardener goes before to open the shutters.

As is usually the case with people who go over houses, Mr. Guppy 
and his friend are dead beat before they have well begun.  They 
straggle about in wrong places, look at wrong things, don't care 
for the right things, gape when more rooms are opened, exhibit 
profound depression of spirits, and are clearly knocked up.  In 
each successive chamber that they enter, Mrs. Rouncewell, who is as 
upright as the house itself, rests apart in a window-seat or other 
such nook and listens with stately approval to Rosa's exposition.  
Her grandson is so attentive to it that Rosa is shyer than ever--
and prettier.  Thus they pass on from room to room, raising the 
pictured Dedlocks for a few brief minutes as the young gardener 
admits the light, and reconsigning them to their graves as he shuts 
it out again.  It appears to the afflicted Mr. Guppy and his 
inconsolable friend that there is no end to the Dedlocks, whose 
family greatness seems to consist in their never having done 
anything to distinguish themselves for seven hundred years.

Even the long drawing-room of Chesney Wold cannot revive Mr. 
Guppy's spirits.  He is so low that he droops on the threshold and 
has hardly strength of mind to enter.  But a portrait over the 
chimney-piece, painted by the fashionable artist of the day, acts 
upon him like a charm.  He recovers in a moment.  He stares at it 
with uncommon interest; he seems to be fixed and fascinated by it.

"Dear me!" says Mr. Guppy.  "Who's that?"

"The picture over the fire-place," says Rosa, "is the portrait of 
the present Lady Dedlock.  It is considered a perfect likeness, and 
the best work of the master."

"'Blest," says Mr. Guppy, staring in a kind of dismay at his 
friend, "if I can ever have seen her.  Yet I know her!  Has the 
picture been engraved, miss?"

"The picture has never been engraved.  Sir Leicester has always 
refused permission."

"Well!" says Mr. Guppy in a low voice.  "I'll be shot if it ain't 
very curious how well I know that picture!  So that's Lady Dedlock, 
is it!"

"The picture on the right is the present Sir Leicester Dedlock.  
The picture on the left is his father, the late Sir Leicester."

Mr. Guppy has no eyes for either of these magnates.  "It's 
unaccountable to me," he says, still staring at the portrait, "how 
well I know that picture!  I'm dashed," adds Mr. Guppy, looking 
round, "if I don't think I must have had a dream of that picture, 
you know!"

As no one present takes any especial interest in Mr. Guppy's 
dreams, the probability is not pursued.  But he still remains so 
absorbed by the portrait that he stands immovable before it until 
the young gardener has closed the shutters, when he comes out of 
the room in a dazed state that is an odd though a sufficient 
substitute for interest and follows into the succeeding rooms with 
a confused stare, as if he were looking everywhere for Lady Dedlock 
again.

He sees no more of her.  He sees her rooms, which are the last 
shown, as being very elegant, and he looks out of the windows from 
which she looked out, not long ago, upon the weather that bored her 
to death.  All things have an end, even houses that people take 
infinite pains to see and are tired of before they begin to see 
them.  He has come to the end of the sight, and the fresh village 
beauty to the end of her description; which is always this: "The 
terrace below is much admired.  It is called, from an old story in 
the family, the Ghost's Walk."

"No?" says Mr. Guppy, greedily curious.  "What's the story, miss?  
Is it anything about a picture?"

"Pray tell us the story," says Watt in a half whisper.

"I don't know it, sir."  Rosa is shyer than ever.

"It is not related to visitors; it is almost forgotten," says the 
housekeeper, advancing.  "It has never been more than a family 
anecdote."

"You'll excuse my asking again if it has anything to do with a 
picture, ma'am," observes Mr. Guppy, "because I do assure you that 
the more I think of that picture the better I know it, without 
knowing how I know it!"

The story has nothing to do with a picture; the housekeeper can 
guarantee that.  Mr. Guppy is obliged to her for the information 
and is, moreover, generally obliged.  He retires with his friend, 
guided down another staircase by the young gardener, and presently 
is heard to drive away.  It is now dusk.  Mrs. Rouncewell can trust 
to the discretion of her two young hearers and may tell THEM how 
the terrace came to have that ghostly name.

She seats herself in a large chair by the fast-darkening window and 
tells them: "In the wicked days, my dears, of King Charles the 
First--I mean, of course, in the wicked days of the rebels who 
leagued themselves against that excellent king--Sir Morbury Dedlock 
was the owner of Chesney Wold.  Whether there was any account of a 
ghost in the family before those days, I can't say.  I should think 
it very likely indeed."

Mrs. Rouncewell holds this opinion because she considers that a 
family of such antiquity and importance has a right to a ghost.  
She regards a ghost as one of the privileges of the upper classes, 
a genteel distinction to which the common people have no claim.

"Sir Morbury Dedlock," says Mrs. Rouncewell, "was, I have no 
occasion to say, on the side of the blessed martyr.  But it IS 
supposed that his Lady, who had none of the family blood in her 
veins, favoured the bad cause.  It is said that she had relations 
among King Charles's enemies, that she was in correspondence with 
them, and that she gave them information.  When any of the country 
gentlemen who followed his Majesty's cause met here, it is said 
that my Lady was always nearer to the door of their council-room 
than they supposed.  Do you hear a sound like a footstep passing 
along the terrace, Watt?"

Rosa draws nearer to the housekeeper.

"I hear the rain-drip on the stones," replies the young man, "and I 
hear a curious echo--I suppose an echo--which is very like a 
halting step."

The housekeeper gravely nods and continues: "Partly on account of 
this division between them, and partly on other accounts, Sir 
Morbury and his Lady led a troubled life.  She was a lady of a 
haughty temper.  They were not well suited to each other in age or 
character, and they had no children to moderate between them.  
After her favourite brother, a young gentleman, was killed in the 
civil wars (by Sir Morbury's near kinsman), her feeling was so 
violent that she hated the race into which she had married.  When 
the Dedlocks were about to ride out from Chesney Wold in the king's 
cause, she is supposed to have more than once stolen down into the 
stables in the dead of night and lamed their horses; and the story 
is that once at such an hour, her husband saw her gliding down the 
stairs and followed her into the stall where his own favourite 
horse stood.  There he seized her by the wrist, and in a struggle 
or in a fall or through the horse being frightened and lashing out, 
she was lamed in the hip and from that hour began to pine away."

The housekeeper has dropped her voice to a little more than a 
whisper.

"She had been a lady of a handsome figure and a noble carriage.  
She never complained of the change; she never spoke to any one of 
being crippled or of being in pain, but day by day she tried to 
walk upon the terrace, and with the help of the stone balustrade, 
went up and down, up and down, up and down, in sun and shadow, with 
greater difficulty every day.  At last, one afternoon her husband 
(to whom she had never, on any persuasion, opened her lips since 
that night), standing at the great south window, saw her drop upon 
the pavement.  He hastened down to raise her, but she repulsed him 
as he bent over her, and looking at him fixedly and coldly, said, 
'I will die here where I have walked.  And I will walk here, though 
I am in my grave.  I will walk here until the pride of this house 
is humbled.  And when calamity or when disgrace is coming to it, 
let the Dedlocks listen for my step!'

Watt looks at Rosa.  Rosa in the deepening gloom looks down upon 
the ground, half frightened and half shy.

"There and then she died.  And from those days," says Mrs. 
Rouncewell, "the name has come down--the Ghost's Walk.  If the 
tread is an echo, it is an echo that is only heard after dark, and 
is often unheard for a long while together.  But it comes back from 
time to time; and so sure as there is sickness or death in the 
family, it will be heard then."

"And disgrace, grandmother--" says Watt.

"Disgrace never comes to Chesney Wold," returns the housekeeper.

Her grandson apologizes with "True.  True."

"That is the story.  Whatever the sound is, it is a worrying 
sound," says Mrs. Rouncewell, getting up from her chair; "and what 
is to be noticed in it is that it MUST BE HEARD.  My Lady, who is 
afraid of nothing, admits that when it is there, it must be heard.  
You cannot shut it out.  Watt, there is a tall French clock behind 
you (placed there, 'a purpose) that has a loud beat when it is in 
motion and can play music.  You understand how those things are 
managed?"

"Pretty well, grandmother, I think."

"Set it a-going."

Watt sets it a-going--music and all.

"Now, come hither," says the housekeeper.  "Hither, child, towards 
my Lady's pillow.  I am not sure that it is dark enough yet, but 
listen!  Can you hear the sound upon the terrace, through the 
music, and the beat, and everything?"

"I certainly can!"

"So my Lady says."



CHAPTER VIII

Covering a Multitude of Sins


It was interesting when I dressed before daylight to peep out of 
window, where my candles were reflected in the black panes like two 
beacons, and finding all beyond still enshrouded in the 
indistinctness of last night, to watch how it turned out when the 
day came on.  As the prospect gradually revealed itself and 
disclosed the scene over which the wind had wandered in the dark, 
like my memory over my life, I had a pleasure in discovering the 
unknown objects that had been around me in my sleep.  At first they 
were faintly discernible in the mist, and above them the later 
stars still glimmered.  That pale interval over, the picture began 
to enlarge and fill up so fast that at every new peep I could have 
found enough to look at for an hour.  Imperceptibly my candles 
became the only incongruous part of the morning, the dark places in 
my room all melted away, and the day shone bright upon a cheerful 
landscape, prominent in which the old Abbey Church, with its 
massive tower, threw a softer train of shadow on the view than 
seemed compatible with its rugged character.  But so from rough 
outsides (I hope I have learnt), serene and gentle influences often 
proceed.

Every part of the house was in such order, and every one was so 
attentive to me, that I had no trouble with my two bunches of keys, 
though what with trying to remember the contents of each little 
store-room drawer and cupboard; and what with making notes on a 
slate about jams, and pickles, and preserves, and bottles, and 
glass, and china, and a great many other things; and what with 
being generally a methodical, old-maidish sort of foolish little 
person, I was so busy that I could not believe it was breakfast-
time when I heard the bell ring.  Away I ran, however, and made 
tea, as I had already been installed into the responsibility of the 
tea-pot; and then, as they were all rather late and nobody was down 
yet, I thought I would take a peep at the garden and get some 
knowledge of that too.  I found it quite a delightful place--in 
front, the pretty avenue and drive by which we had approached (and 
where, by the by, we had cut up the gravel so terribly with our 
wheels that I asked the gardener to roll it); at the back, the 
flower-garden, with my darling at her window up there, throwing it 
open to smile out at me, as if she would have kissed me from that 
distance.  Beyond the flower-garden was a kitchen-garden, and then 
a paddock, and then a snug little rick-yard, and then a dear little 
farm-yard.  As to the house itself, with its three peaks in the 
roof; its various-shaped windows, some so large, some so small, and 
all so pretty; its trellis-work, against the southfront for roses 
and honey-suckle, and its homely, comfortable, welcoming look--it 
was, as Ada said when she came out to meet me with her arm through 
that of its master, worthy of her cousin John, a bold thing to say, 
though he only pinched her dear cheek for it.

Mr. Skimpole was as agreeable at breakfast as he had been 
overnight.  There was honey on the table, and it led him into a 
discourse about bees.  He had no objection to honey, he said (and I 
should think he had not, for he seemed to like it), but he 
protested against the overweening assumptions of bees.  He didn't 
at all see why the busy bee should be proposed as a model to him; 
he supposed the bee liked to make honey, or he wouldn't do it--
nobody asked him.  It was not necessary for the bee to make such a 
merit of his tastes.  If every confectioner went buzzing about the 
world banging against everything that came in his way and 
egotistically calling upon everybody to take notice that he was 
going to his work and must not be interrupted, the world would be 
quite an unsupportable place.  Then, after all, it was a ridiculous 
position to be smoked out of your fortune with brimstone as soon as 
you had made it.  You would have a very mean opinion of a 
Manchester man if he spun cotton for no other purpose.  He must say 
he thought a drone the embodiment of a pleasanter and wiser idea.  
The drone said unaffectedly, "You will excuse me; I really cannot 
attend to the shop!  I find myself in a world in which there is so 
much to see and so short a time to see it in that I must take the 
liberty of looking about me and begging to be provided for by 
somebody who doesn't want to look about him."  This appeared to Mr. 
Skimpole to be the drone philosophy, and he thought it a very good 
philosophy, always supposing the drone to be willing to be on good 
terms with the bee, which, so far as he knew, the easy fellow 
always was, if the consequential creature would only let him, and 
not be so conceited about his honey!

He pursued this fancy with the lightest foot over a variety of 
ground and made us all merry, though again he seemed to have as 
serious a meaning in what he said as he was capable of having.  I 
left them still listening to him when I withdrew to attend to my 
new duties.  They had occupied me for some time, and I was passing 
through the passages on my return with my basket of keys on my arm 
when Mr. Jarndyce called me into a small room next his bed-chamber, 
which I found to be in part a little library of books and papers 
and in part quite a little museum of his boots and shoes and hat-
boxes.

"Sit down, my dear," said Mr. Jarndyce.  "This, you must know, is 
the growlery.  When I am out of humour, I come and growl here."

"You must be here very seldom, sir," said I.

"Oh, you don't know me!" he returned.  "When I am deceived or 
disappointed in--the wind, and it's easterly, I take refuge here.  
The growlery is the best-used room in the house.  You are not aware 
of half my humours yet.  My dear, how you are trembling!"

I could not help it; I tried very hard, but being alone with that 
benevolent presence, and meeting his kind eyes, and feeling so 
happy and so honoured there, and my heart so full--

I kissed his hand.  I don't know what I said, or even that I spoke.  
He was disconcerted and walked to the window; I almost believed 
with an intention of jumping out, until he turned and I was 
reassured by seeing in his eyes what he had gone there to hide.  He 
gently patted me on the head, and I sat down.

"There!  There!" he said.  "That's over.  Pooh!  Don't be foolish."

"It shall not happen again, sir," I returned, "but at first it is 
difficult--"

"Nonsense!" he said.  "It's easy, easy.  Why not?  I hear of a good 
little orphan girl without a protector, and I take it into my head 
to be that protector.  She grows up, and more than justifies my 
good opinion, and I remain her guardian and her friend.  What is 
there in all this?  So, so!  Now, we have cleared off old scores, 
and I have before me thy pleasant, trusting, trusty face again."

I said to myself, "Esther, my dear, you surprise me!  This really 
is not what I expected of you!"  And it had such a good effect that 
I folded my hands upon my basket and quite recovered myself.  Mr. 
Jarndyce, expressing his approval in his face, began to talk to me 
as confidentially as if I had been in the habit of conversing with 
him every morning for I don't know how long.  I almost felt as if I 
had.

"Of course, Esther," he said, "you don't understand this Chancery 
business?"

And of course I shook my head.

"I don't know who does," he returned.  "The lawyers have twisted it 
into such a state of bedevilment that the original merits of the 
case have long disappeared from the face of the earth.  It's about 
a will and the trusts under a will--or it was once.  It's about 
nothing but costs now.  We are always appearing, and disappearing, 
and swearing, and interrogating, and filing, and cross-filing, and 
arguing, and sealing, and motioning, and referring, and reporting, 
and revolving about the Lord Chancellor and all his satellites, and 
equitably waltzing ourselves off to dusty death, about costs.  
That's the great question.  All the rest, by some extraordinary 
means, has melted away."

"But it was, sir," said I, to bring him back, for he began to rub 
his head, "about a will?"

"Why, yes, it was about a will when it was about anything," he 
returned.   "A certain Jarndyce, in an evil hour, made a great 
fortune, and made a great will.  In the question how the trusts 
under that will are to be administered, the fortune left by the 
will is squandered away; the legatees under the will are reduced to 
such a miserable condition that they would be sufficiently punished 
if they had committed an enormous crime in having money left them, 
and the will itself is made a dead letter.  All through the 
deplorable cause, everything that everybody in it, except one man, 
knows already is referred to that only one man who don't know it to 
find out--all through the deplorable cause, everybody must have 
copies, over and over again, of everything that has accumulated 
about it in the way of cartloads of papers (or must pay for them 
without having them, which is the usual course, for nobody wants 
them) and must go down the middle and up again through such an 
infernal country-dance of costs and fees and nonsense and 
corruption as was never dreamed of in the wildest visions of a 
witch's Sabbath.  Equity sends questions to law, law sends 
questions back to equity; law finds it can't do this, equity finds 
it can't do that; neither can so much as say it can't do anything, 
without this solicitor instructing and this counsel appearing for 
A, and that solicitor instructing and that counsel appearing for B; 
and so on through the whole alphabet, like the history of the apple 
pie.  And thus, through years and years, and lives and lives, 
everything goes on, constantly beginning over and over again, and 
nothing ever ends.  And we can't get out of the suit on any terms, 
for we are made parties to it, and MUST BE parties to it, whether 
we like it or not.  But it won't do to think of it!  When my great 
uncle, poor Tom Jarndyce, began to think of it, it was the 
beginning of the end!"

"The Mr. Jarndyce, sir, whose story I have heard?"

He nodded gravely.  "I was his heir, and this was his house, 
Esther.  When I came here, it was bleak indeed.  He had left the 
signs of his misery upon it."

"How changed it must be now!" I said.

"It had been called, before his time, the Peaks.  He gave it its 
present name and lived here shut up, day and night poring over the 
wicked heaps of papers in the suit and hoping against hope to 
disentangle it from its mystification and bring it to a close.  In 
the meantime, the place became dilapidated, the wind whistled 
through the cracked walls, the rain fell through the broken roof, 
the weeds choked the passage to the rotting door.  When I brought 
what remained of him home here, the brains seemed to me to have 
been blown out of the house too, it was so shattered and ruined."

He walked a little to and fro after saying this to himself with a 
shudder, and then looked at me, and brightened, and came and sat 
down again with his hands in his pockets.

"I told you this was the growlery, my dear.  Where was I?"

I reminded him, at the hopeful change he had made in Bleak House.

"Bleak House; true.  There is, in that city of London there, some 
property of ours which is much at this day what Bleak House was 
then; I say property of ours, meaning of the suit's, but I ought to 
call it the property of costs, for costs is the only power on earth 
that will ever get anything out of it now or will ever know it for 
anything but an eyesore and a heartsore.  It is a street of 
perishing blind houses, with their eyes stoned out, without a pane 
of glass, without so much as a window-frame, with the bare blank 
shutters tumbling from their hinges and falling asunder, the iron 
rails peeling away in flakes of rust, the chimneys sinking in, the 
stone steps to every door (and every door might be death's door) 
turning stagnant green, the very crutches on which the ruins are 
propped decaying.  Although Bleak House was not in Chancery, its 
master was, and it was stamped with the same seal.  These are the 
Great Seal's impressions, my dear, all over England--the children 
know them!"

"How changed it is!" I said again.

"Why, so it is," he answered much more cheerfully; "and it is 
wisdom in you to keep me to the bright side of the picture."  (The 
idea of my wisdom!)  "These are things I never talk about or even 
think about, excepting in the growlery here.  If you consider it 
right to mention them to Rick and Ada," looking seriously at me, 
"you can.  I leave it to your discretion, Esther."

"I hope, sir--" said I.

"I think you had better call me guardian, my dear."

I felt that I was choking again--I taxed myself with it, "Esther, 
now, you know you are!"--when he feigned to say this slightly, as 
if it were a whim instead of a thoughtful tenderness.  But I gave 
the housekeeping keys the least shake in the world as a reminder to 
myself, and folding my hands in a still more determined manner on 
the basket, looked at him quietly.

"I hope, guardian," said I, "that you may not trust too much to my 
discretion.  I hope you may not mistake me.  I am afraid it will be 
a disappointment to you to know that I am not clever, but it really 
is the truth, and you would soon find it out if I had not the 
honesty to confess it."

He did not seem at all disappointed; quite the contrary.  He told 
me, with a smile all over his face, that he knew me very well 
indeed and that I was quite clever enough for him.

"I hope I may turn out so," said I, "but I am much afraid of it, 
guardian."

"You are clever enough to be the good little woman of our lives 
here, my dear," he returned playfully; "the little old woman of the 
child's (I don't mean Skimpole's) rhyme:


     'Little old woman, and whither so high?'
     'To sweep the cobwebs out of the sky.'


You will sweep them so neatly out of OUR sky in the course of your 
housekeeping, Esther, that one of these days we shall have to 
abandon the growlery and nail up the door."

This was the beginning of my being called Old Woman, and Little Old 
Woman, and Cobweb, and Mrs. Shipton, and Mother Hubbard, and Dame 
Durden, and so many names of that sort that my own name soon became 
quite lost among them.

"However," said Mr. Jarndyce, "to return to our gossip.  Here's 
Rick, a fine young fellow full of promise.  What's to be done with 
him?"

Oh, my goodness, the idea of asking my advice on such a point!

"Here he is, Esther," said Mr. Jarndyce, comfortably putting his 
hands into his pockets and stretching out his legs.  "He must have 
a profession; he must make some choice for himself.  There will be 
a world more wiglomeration about it, I suppose, but it must be 
done."

"More what, guardian?" said I.

"More wiglomeration," said he.  "It's the only name I know for the 
thing.  He is a ward in Chancery, my dear.  Kenge and Carboy will 
have something to say about it; Master Somebody--a sort of 
ridiculous sexton, digging graves for the merits of causes in a 
back room at the end of Quality Court, Chancery Lane--will have 
something to say about it; counsel will have something to say about 
it; the Chancellor will have something to say about it; the 
satellites will have something to say about it; they will all have 
to be handsomely feed, all round, about it; the whole thing will be 
vastly ceremonious, wordy, unsatisfactory, and expensive, and I 
call it, in general, wiglomeration.  How mankind ever came to be 
afflicted with wiglomeration, or for whose sins these young people 
ever fell into a pit of it, I don't know; so it is."

He began to rub his head again and to hint that he felt the wind.  
But it was a delightful instance of his kindness towards me that 
whether he rubbed his head, or walked about, or did both, his face 
was sure to recover its benignant expression as it looked at mine; 
and he was sure to turn comfortable again and put his hands in his 
pockets and stretch out his legs.

"Perhaps it would be best, first of all," said I, "to ask Mr. 
Richard what he inclines to himself."

"Exactly so," he returned.  "That's what I mean!  You know, just 
accustom yourself to talk it over, with your tact and in your quiet 
way, with him and Ada, and see what you all make of it.  We are 
sure to come at the heart of the matter by your means, little 
woman."

I really was frightened at the thought of the importance I was 
attaining and the number of things that were being confided to me.  
I had not meant this at all; I had meant that he should speak to 
Richard.  But of course I said nothing in reply except that I would 
do my best, though I feared (I realty felt it necessary to repeat 
this) that he thought me much more sagacious than I was.  At which 
my guardian only laughed the pleasantest laugh I ever heard.

"Come!" he said, rising and pushing back his chair.  "I think we 
may have done with the growlery for one day!  Only a concluding 
word.  Esther, my dear, do you wish to ask me anything?"

He looked so attentively at me that I looked attentively at him and 
felt sure I understood him.

"About myself, sir?" said I.

"Yes."

"Guardian," said I, venturing to put my hand, which was suddenly 
colder than I could have wished, in his, "nothing!  I am quite sure 
that if there were anything I ought to know or had any need to 
know, I should not have to ask you to tell it to me.  If my whole 
reliance and confidence were not placed in you, I must have a hard 
heart indeed.  I have nothing to ask you, nothing in the world."

He drew my hand through his arm and we went away to look for Ada.  
From that hour I felt quite easy with him, quite unreserved, quite 
content to know no more, quite happy.

We lived, at first, rather a busy life at Bleak House, for we had 
to become acquainted with many residents in and out of the 
neighbourhood who knew Mr. Jarndyce.  It seemed to Ada and me that 
everybody knew him who wanted to do anything with anybody else's 
money.  It amazed us when we began to sort his letters and to 
answer some of them for him in the growlery of a morning to find 
how the great object of the lives of nearly all his correspondents 
appeared to be to form themselves into committees for getting in 
and laying out money.  The ladies were as desperate as the 
gentlemen; indeed, I think they were even more so.  They threw 
themselves into committees in the most impassioned manner and 
collected subscriptions with a vehemence quite extraordinary.  It 
appeared to us that some of them must pass their whole lives in 
dealing out subscription-cards to the whole post-office directory--
shilling cards, half-crown cards, half-sovereign cards, penny 
cards.  They wanted everything.  They wanted wearing apparel, they 
wanted linen rags, they wanted money, they wanted coals, they 
wanted soup, they wanted interest, they wanted autographs, they 
wanted flannel, they wanted whatever Mr. Jarndyce had--or had not.  
Their objects were as various as their demands.  They were going to 
raise new buildings, they were going to pay off debts on old 
buildings, they were going to establish in a picturesque building 
(engraving of proposed west elevation attached) the Sisterhood of 
Mediaeval Marys, they were going to give a testimonial to Mrs. 
Jellyby, they were going to have their secretary's portrait painted 
and presented to his mother-in-law, whose deep devotion to him was 
well known, they were going to get up everything, I really believe, 
from five hundred thousand tracts to an annuity and from a marble 
monument to a silver tea-pot.  They took a multitude of titles.  
They were the Women of England, the Daughters of Britain, the 
Sisters of all the cardinal virtues separately, the Females of 
America, the Ladies of a hundred denominations.  They appeared to 
be always excited about canvassing and electing.  They seemed to 
our poor wits, and according to their own accounts, to be 
constantly polling people by tens of thousands, yet never bringing 
their candidates in for anything.  It made our heads ache to think, 
on the whole, what feverish lives they must lead.

Among the ladies who were most distinguished for this rapacious 
benevolence (if I may use the expression) was a Mrs. Pardiggle, who 
seemed, as I judged from the number of her letters to Mr. Jarndyce, 
to be almost as powerful a correspondent as Mrs. Jellyby herself.  
We observed that the wind always changed when Mrs. Pardiggle became 
the subject of conversation and that it invariably interrupted Mr. 
Jarndyce and prevented his going any farther, when he had remarked 
that there were two classes of charitable people; one, the people 
who did a little and made a great deal of noise; the other, the 
people who did a great deal and made no noise at all.  We were 
therefore curious to see Mrs. Pardiggle, suspecting her to be a 
type of the former class, and were glad when she called one day 
with her five young sons.

She was a formidable style of lady with spectacles, a prominent 
nose, and a loud voice, who had the effect of wanting a great deal 
of room.  And she really did, for she knocked down little chairs 
with her skirts that were quite a great way off.  As only Ada and I 
were at home, we received her timidly, for she seemed to come in 
like cold weather and to make the little Pardiggles blue as they 
followed.

"These, young ladies," said Mrs. Pardiggle with great volubility 
after the first salutations, "are my five boys.  You may have seen 
their names in a printed subscription list (perhaps more than one) 
in the possession of our esteemed friend Mr. Jarndyce.  Egbert, my 
eldest (twelve), is the boy who sent out his pocket-money, to the 
amount of five and threepence, to the Tockahoopo Indians.  Oswald, 
my second (ten and a half), is the child who contributed two and 
nine-pence to the Great National Smithers Testimonial.  Francis, my 
third (nine), one and sixpence halfpenny; Felix, my fourth (seven), 
eightpence to the Superannuated Widows; Alfred, my youngest (five), 
has voluntarily enrolled himself in the Infant Bonds of Joy, and is 
pledged never, through life, to use tobacco in any form."

We had never seen such dissatisfied children.  It was not merely 
that they were weazened and shrivelled--though they were certainly 
that to--but they looked absolutely ferocious with discontent.  At 
the mention of the Tockahoopo Indians, I could really have supposed 
Eghert to be one of the most baleful members of that tribe, he gave 
me such a savage frown.  The face of each child, as the amount of 
his contribution was mentioned, darkened in a peculiarly vindictive 
manner, but his was by far the worst.  I must except, however, the 
little recruit into the Infant Bonds of Joy, who was stolidly and 
evenly miserable.

"You have been visiting, I understand," said Mrs. Pardiggle, "at 
Mrs. Jellyby's?"

We said yes, we had passed one night there.

"Mrs. Jellyby," pursued the lady, always speaking in the same 
demonstrative, loud, hard tone, so that her voice impressed my 
fancy as if it had a sort of spectacles on too--and I may take the 
opportunity of remarking that her spectacles were made the less 
engaging by her eyes being what Ada called "choking eyes," meaning 
very prominent--"Mrs. Jellyby is a benefactor to society and 
deserves a helping hand.  My boys have contributed to the African 
project--Egbert, one and six, being the entire allowance of nine 
weeks; Oswald, one and a penny halfpenny, being the same; the rest, 
according to their little means.  Nevertheless, I do not go with 
Mrs. Jellyby in all things.  I do not go with Mrs. Jellyby in her 
treatment of her young family.  It has been noticed.  It has been 
observed that her young family are excluded from participation in 
the objects to which she is devoted.  She may be right, she may be 
wrong; but, right or wrong, this is not my course with MY young 
family.  I take them everywhere."

I was afterwards convinced (and so was Ada) that from the ill-
conditioned eldest child, these words extorted a sharp yell.  He 
turned it off into a yawn, but it began as a yell.

"They attend matins with me (very prettily done) at half-past six 
o'clock in the morning all the year round, including of course the 
depth of winter," said Mrs. Pardiggle rapidly, "and they are with 
me during the revolving duties of the day.  I am a School lady, I 
am a Visiting lady, I am a Reading lady, I am a Distributing lady; 
I am on the local Linen Box Committee and many general committees; 
and my canvassing alone is very extensive--perhaps no one's more 
so.  But they are my companions everywhere; and by these means they 
acquire that knowledge of the poor, and that capacity of doing 
charitable business in general--in short, that taste for the sort 
of thing--which will render them in after life a service to their 
neighbours and a satisfaction to themselves.  My young family are 
not frivolous; they expend the entire amount of their allowance in 
subscriptions, under my direction; and they have attended as many 
public meetings and listened to as many lectures, orations, and 
discussions as generally fall to the lot of few grown people.  
Alfred (five), who, as I mentioned, has of his own election joined 
the Infant Bonds of Joy, was one of the very few children who 
manifested consciousness on that occasion after a fervid address of 
two hours from the chairman of the evening."

Alfred glowered at us as if he never could, or would, forgive the 
injury of that night.

"You may have observed, Miss Summerson," said Mrs. Pardiggle, "in 
some of the lists to which I have referred, in the possession of 
our esteemed friend Mr. Jarndyce, that the names of my young family 
are concluded with the name of O. A. Pardiggle, F.R.S., one pound.  
That is their father.  We usually observe the same routine.  I put 
down my mite first; then my young family enrol their contributions, 
according to their ages and their little means; and then Mr. 
Pardiggle brings up the rear.  Mr. Pardiggle is happy to throw in 
his limited donation, under my direction; and thus things are made 
not only pleasant to ourselves, but, we trust, improving to 
others."

Suppose Mr. Pardiggle were to dine with Mr. Jellyby, and suppose 
Mr. Jellyby were to relieve his mind after dinner to Mr. Pardiggle, 
would Mr. Pardiggle, in return, make any confidential communication 
to Mr. Jellyby?  I was quite confused to find myself thinking this, 
but it came into my head.

"You are very pleasantly situated here!" said Mrs. Pardiggle.

We were glad to change the subject, and going to the window, 
pointed out the beauties of the prospect, on which the spectacles 
appeared to me to rest with curious indifference.

"You know Mr. Gusher?" said our visitor.

We were obliged to say that we had not the pleasure of Mr. Gusher's 
acquaintance.

"The loss is yours, I assure you," said Mrs. Pardiggle with her 
commanding deportment.  "He is a very fervid, impassioned speaker-
full of fire!  Stationed in a waggon on this lawn, now, which, from 
the shape of the land, is naturally adapted to a public meeting, he 
would improve almost any occasion you could mention for hours and 
hours!  By this time, young ladies," said Mrs. Pardiggle, moving 
back to her chair and overturning, as if by invisible agency, a 
little round table at a considerable distance with my work-basket 
on it, "by this time you have found me out, I dare say?"

This was really such a confusing question that Ada looked at me in 
perfect dismay.  As to the guilty nature of my own consciousness 
after what I had been thinking, it must have been expressed in the 
colour of my cheeks.

"Found out, I mean," said Mrs. Pardiggle, "the prominent point in 
my character.  I am aware that it is so prominent as to be 
discoverable immediately.  I lay myself open to detection, I know.  
Well!  I freely admit, I am a woman of business.  I love hard work; 
I enjoy hard work.  The excitement does me good.  I am so 
accustomed and inured to hard work that I don't know what fatigue 
is."

We murmured that it was very astonishing and very gratifying, or 
something to that effect.  I don't think we knew what it was 
either, but this is what our politeness expressed.

"I do not understand what it is to be tired; you cannot tire me if 
you try!" said Mrs. Pardiggle.  "The quantity of exertion (which is 
no exertion to me), the amount of business (which I regard as 
nothing), that I go through sometimes astonishes myself.  I have 
seen my young family, and Mr. Pardiggle, quite worn out with 
witnessing it, when I may truly say I have been as fresh as a 
lark!"

If that dark-visaged eldest boy could look more malicious than he 
had already looked, this was the time when he did it.  I observed 
that he doubled his right fist and delivered a secret blow into the 
crown of his cap, which was under his left arm.

"This gives me a great advantage when I am making my rounds," said 
Mrs. Pardiggle.  "If I find a person unwilling to hear what I have 
to say, I tell that person directly, 'I am incapable of fatigue, my 
good friend, I am never tired, and I mean to go on until I have 
done.'  It answers admirably!  Miss Summerson, I hope I shall have 
your assistance in my visiting rounds immediately, and Miss Clare's 
very soon."

At first I tried to excuse myself for the present on the general 
ground of having occupations to attend to which I must not neglect.  
But as this was an ineffectual protest, I then said, more 
particularly, that I was not sure of my qualifications.  That I was 
inexperienced in the art of adapting my mind to minds very 
differently situated, and addressing them from suitable points of 
view.  That I had not that delicate knowledge of the heart which 
must be essential to such a work.  That I had much to learn, 
myself, before I could teach others, and that I could not confide 
in my good intentions alone.  For these reasons I thought it best 
to be as useful as I could, and to render what kind services I 
could to those immediately about me, and to try to let that circle 
of duty gradually and naturally expand itself.  All this I said 
with anything but confidence, because Mrs. Pardiggle was much older 
than I, and had great experience, and was so very military in her 
manners.

"You are wrong, Miss Summerson," said she, "but perhaps you are not 
equal to hard work or the excitement of it, and that makes a vast 
difference.  If you would like to see how I go through my work, I 
am now about--with my young family--to visit a brickmaker in the 
neighbourhood (a very bad character) and shall be glad to take you 
with me.  Miss Clare also, if she will do me the favour."

Ada and I interchanged looks, and as we were going out in any case, 
accepted the offer.  When we hastily returned from putting on our 
bonnets, we found the young family languishing in a corner and Mrs. 
Pardiggle sweeping about the room, knocking down nearly all the 
light objects it contained.  Mrs. Pardiggle took possession of Ada, 
and I followed with the family.

Ada told me afterwards that Mrs. Pardiggle talked in the same loud 
tone (that, indeed, I overheard) all the way to the brickmaker's 
about an exciting contest which she had for two or three years 
waged against another lady relative to the bringing in of their 
rival candidates for a pension somewhere.  There had been a 
quantity of printing, and promising, and proxying, and polling, and 
it appeared to have imparted great liveliness to all concerned, 
except the pensioners--who were not elected yet.

I am very fond of being confided in by children and am happy in 
being usually favoured in that respect, but on this occasion it 
gave me great uneasiness.  As soon as we were out of doors, Egbert, 
with the manner of a little footpad, demanded a shilling of me on 
the ground that his pocket-money was "boned" from him.  On my 
pointing out the great impropriety of the word, especially in 
connexion with his parent (for he added sulkily "By her!"), he 
pinched me and said, "Oh, then!  Now!  Who are you!  YOU wouldn't 
like it, I think?  What does she make a sham for, and pretend to 
give me money, and take it away again?  Why do you call it my 
allowance, and never let me spend it?"  These exasperating 
questions so inflamed his mind and the minds of Oswald and Francis 
that they all pinched me at once, and in a dreadfully expert way--
screwing up such little pieces of my arms that I could hardly 
forbear crying out.  Felix, at the same time, stamped upon my toes.  
And the Bond of Joy, who on account of always having the whole of 
his little income anticipated stood in fact pledged to abstain from 
cakes as well as tobacco, so swelled with grief and rage when we 
passed a pastry-cook's shop that he terrified me by becoming 
purple.  I never underwent so much, both in body and mind, in the 
course of a walk with young people as from these unnaturally 
constrained children when they paid me the compliment of being 
natural.

I was glad when we came to the brickmaker's house, though it was 
one of a cluster of wretched hovels in a brick-field, with pigsties 
close to the broken windows and miserable little gardens before the 
doors growing nothing but stagnant pools.  Here and there an old 
tub was put to catch the droppings of rain-water from a roof, or 
they were banked up with mud into a little pond like a large dirt-
pie.  At the doors and windows some men and women lounged or 
prowled about, and took little notice of us except to laugh to one 
another or to say something as we passed about gentlefolks minding 
their own business and not troubling their heads and muddying their 
shoes with coming to look after other people's.

Mrs. Pardiggle, leading the way with a great show of moral 
determination and talking with much volubility about the untidy 
habits of the people (though I doubted if the best of us could have 
been tidy in such a place), conducted us into a cottage at the 
farthest corner, the ground-floor room of which we nearly filled.  
Besides ourselves, there were in this damp, offensive room a woman 
with a black eye, nursing a poor little gasping baby by the fire; a 
man, all stained with clay and mud and looking very dissipated, 
lying at full length on the ground, smoking a pipe; a powerful 
young man fastening a collar on a dog; and a bold girl doing some 
kind of washing in very dirty water.  They all looked up at us as 
we came in, and the woman seemed to turn her face towards the fire 
as if to hide her bruised eye; nobody gave us any welcome.

"Well, my friends," said Mrs. Pardiggle, but her voice had not a 
friendly sound, I thought; it was much too businesslike and 
systematic.  "How do you do, all of you?  I am here again.  I told 
you, you couldn't tire me, you know.  I am fond of hard work, and 
am true to my word."

"There an't," growled the man on the floor, whose head rested on 
his hand as he stared at us, "any more on you to come in, is 
there?"

"No, my friend," said Mrs. Pardiggle, seating herself on one stool 
and knocking down another.  "We are all here."

"Because I thought there warn't enough of you, perhaps?" said the 
man, with his pipe between his lips as he looked round upon us.

The young man and the girl both laughed.  Two friends of the young 
man, whom we had attracted to the doorway and who stood there with 
their hands in their pockets, echoed the laugh noisily.

"You can't tire me, good people," said Mrs. Pardiggle to these 
latter.  "I enjoy hard work, and the harder you make mine, the 
better I like it."

"Then make it easy for her!" growled the man upon the floor.  "I 
wants it done, and over.  I wants a end of these liberties took 
with my place.  I wants an end of being drawed like a badger.  Now 
you're a-going to poll-pry and question according to custom--I know 
what you're a-going to be up to.  Well!  You haven't got no 
occasion to be up to it.  I'll save you the trouble.  Is my 
daughter a-washin?  Yes, she IS a-washin.  Look at the water.  
Smell it!  That's wot we drinks.  How do you like it, and what do 
you think of gin instead!  An't my place dirty?  Yes, it is dirty--
it's nat'rally dirty, and it's nat'rally onwholesome; and we've had 
five dirty and onwholesome children, as is all dead infants, and so 
much the better for them, and for us besides.  Have I read the 
little book wot you left?  No, I an't read the little book wot you 
left.  There an't nobody here as knows how to read it; and if there 
wos, it wouldn't be suitable to me.  It's a book fit for a babby, 
and I'm not a babby.  If you was to leave me a doll, I shouldn't 
nuss it.  How have I been conducting of myself?  Why, I've been 
drunk for three days; and I'da been drunk four if I'da had the 
money.  Don't I never mean for to go to church?  No, I don't never 
mean for to go to church.  I shouldn't be expected there, if I did; 
the beadle's too gen-teel for me.  And how did my wife get that 
black eye?  Why, I give it her; and if she says I didn't, she's a 
lie!"

He had pulled his pipe out of his mouth to say all this, and he now 
turned over on his other side and smoked again.  Mrs. Pardiggle, 
who had been regarding him through her spectacles with a forcible 
composure, calculated, I could not help thinking, to increase his 
antagonism, pulled out a good book as if it were a constable's 
staff and took the whole family into custody.  I mean into 
religious custody, of course; but she really did it as if she were 
an inexorable moral policeman carrying them all off to a station-
house.

Ada and I were very uncomfortable.  We both felt intrusive and out 
of place, and we both thought that Mrs. Pardiggle would have got on 
infinitely better if she had not had such a mechanical way of 
taking possession of people.  The children sulked and stared; the 
family took no notice of us whatever, except when the young man 
made the dog bark, which he usually did when Mrs. Pardiggle was 
most emphatic.  We both felt painfully sensible that between us and 
these people there was an iron barrier which could not be removed 
by our new friend.  By whom or how it could be removed, we did not 
know, but we knew that.  Even what she read and said seemed to us 
to be ill-chosen for such auditors, if it had been imparted ever so 
modestly and with ever so much tact.  As to the little book to 
which the man on the floor had referred, we acqulred a knowledge of 
it afterwards, and Mr. Jarndyce said he doubted if Robinson Crusoe 
could have read it, though he had had no other on his desolate 
island.

We were much relieved, under these circumstances, when Mrs. 
Pardiggle left off.

The man on the floor, then turning his bead round again, said 
morosely, "Well!  You've done, have you?"

"For to-day, I have, my friend.  But I am never fatigued.  I shall 
come to you again in your regular order," returned Mrs. Pardiggle 
with demonstrative cheerfulness.

"So long as you goes now," said he, folding his arms and shutting 
his eyes with an oath, "you may do wot you like!"

Mrs. Pardiggle accordingly rose and made a little vortex in the 
confined room from which the pipe itself very narrowly escaped.  
Taking one of her young family in each hand, and telling the others 
to follow closely, and expressing her hope that the brickmaker and 
all his house would be improved when she saw them next, she then 
proceeded to another cottage.  I hope it is not unkind in me to say 
that she certainly did make, in this as in everything else, a show 
that was not conciliatory of doing charity by wholesale and of 
dealing in it to a large extent.

She supposed that we were following her, but as soon as the space 
was left clear, we approached the woman sitting by the fire to ask 
if the baby were ill.

She only looked at it as it lay on her lap.  We had observed before 
that when she looked at it she covered her discoloured eye with her 
hand, as though she wished to separate any association with noise 
and violence and ill treatment from the poor little child.

Ada, whose gentle heart was moved by its appearance, bent down to 
touch its little face.  As she did so, I saw what happened and drew 
her back.  The child died.

"Oh, Esther!" cried Ada, sinking on her knees beside it.  "Look 
here!  Oh, Esther, my love, the little thing!  The suffering, 
quiet, pretty little thing!  I am so sorry for it.  I am so sorry 
for the mother.  I never saw a sight so pitiful as this before!  
Oh, baby, baby!"

Such compassion, such gentleness, as that with which she bent down 
weeping and put her hand upon the mother's might have softened any 
mother's heart that ever beat.  The woman at first gazed at her in 
astonishment and then burst into tears.

Presently I took the light burden from her lap, did what I could to 
make the baby's rest the prettier and gentler, laid it on a shelf, 
and covered it with my own handkerchief.  We tried to comfort the 
mother, and we whispered to her what Our Saviour said of children.  
She answered nothing, but sat weeping--weeping very much.

When I turned, I found that the young man had taken out the dog and 
was standing at the door looking in upon us with dry eyes, but 
quiet.  The girl was quiet too and sat in a corner looking on the 
ground.  The man had risen.  He still smoked his pipe with an air 
of defiance, but he was silent.

An ugly woman, very poorly clothed, hurried in while I was glancing 
at them, and coming straight up to the mother, said, "Jenny!  
Jenny!"  The mother rose on being so addressed and fell upon the 
woman's neck.

She also had upon her face and arms the marks of ill usage.  She 
had no kind of grace about her, but the grace of sympathy; but when 
she condoled with the woman, and her own tears fell, she wanted no 
beauty.  I say condoled, but her only words were "Jenny!  Jenny!"  
All the rest was in the tone in which she said them.

I thought it very touching to see these two women, coarse and 
shabby and beaten, so united; to see what they could be to one 
another; to see how they felt for one another, how the heart of 
each to each was softened by the hard trials of their lives.  I 
think the best side of such people is almost hidden from us.  What 
the poor are to the poor is little known, excepting to themselves 
and God.

We felt it better to withdraw and leave them uninterrupted.  We 
stole out quietly and without notice from any one except the man.  
He was leaning against the wall near the door, and finding that 
there was scarcely room for us to pass, went out before us.  He 
seemed to want to hide that he did this on our account, but we 
perceived that be did, and thanked him.  He made no answer.

Ada was so full of grief all the way home, and Richard, whom we 
found at home, was so distressed to see her in tears (though he 
said to me, when she was not present, how beautiful it was too!), 
that we arranged to return at night with some little comforts and 
repeat our visit at the brick-maker's house.  We said as little as 
we could to Mr. Jarndyce, but the wind changed directly.

Richard accompanied us at night to the scene of our morning 
expedition.  On our way there, we had to pass a noisy drinking-
house, where a number of men were flocking about the door.  Among 
them, and prominent in some dispute, was the father of the little 
child.  At a short distance, we passed the young man and the dog, 
in congenial company.  The sister was standing laughing and talking 
with some other young women at the corner of the row of cottages, 
but she seemed ashamed and turned away as we went by.

We left our escort within sight of the brickmaker's dwelling and 
proceeded by ourselves.  When we came to the door, we found the 
woman who had brought such consolation with her standing there 
looking anxiously out.

"It's you, young ladies, is it?" she said in a whisper.  "I'm a-
watching for my master.  My heart's in my mouth.  If he was to 
catch me away from home, he'd pretty near murder me."

"Do you mean your husband?" said I.

"Yes, miss, my master.  Jennys asleep, quite worn out.  She's 
scarcely had the child off her lap, poor thing, these seven days 
and nights, except when I've been able to take it for a minute or 
two."

As she gave way for us, she went softly in and put what we had 
brought near the miserable bed on which the mother slept.  No 
effort had been made to clean the room--it seemed in its nature 
almost hopeless of being clean; but the small waxen form from which 
so much solemnity diffused itself had been composed afresh, and 
washed, and neatly dressed in some fragments of white linen; and on 
my handkerchief, which still covered the poor baby, a little bunch 
of sweet herbs had been laid by the same rough, scarred hands, so 
lightly, so tenderly!

"May heaven reward you!" we said to her.  "You are a good woman."

"Me, young ladies?" she returned with surprise.  "Hush!  Jenny, 
Jenny!"

The mother had moaned in her sleep and moved.  The sound of the 
familiar voice seemed to calm her again.  She was quiet once more.

How little I thought, when I raised my handkerchief to look upon 
the tiny sleeper underneath and seemed to see a halo shine around 
the child through Ada's drooping hair as her pity bent her head--
how little I thought in whose unquiet bosom that handkerchief would 
come to lie after covering the motionless and peaceful breast!  I 
only thought that perhaps the Angel of the child might not be all 
unconscious of the woman who replaced it with so compassionate a 
hand; not all unconscious of her presently, when we had taken 
leave, and left her at the door, by turns looking, and listening in 
terror for herself, and saying in her old soothing manner, "Jenny, 
Jenny!"



CHAPTER IX

Signs and Tokens


I don't know how it is I seem to be always writing about myself.  I 
mean all the time to write about other people, and I try to think 
about myself as little as possible, and I am sure, when I find 
myself coming into the story again, I am really vexed and say, 
"Dear, dear, you tiresome little creature, I wish you wouldn't!" 
but it is all of no use.  I hope any one who may read what I write 
will understand that if these pages contain a great deal about me, 
I can only suppose it must be because I have really something to do 
with them and can't be kept out.

My darling and I read together, and worked, and practised, and 
found so much employment for our time that the winter days flew by 
us like bright-winged birds.  Generally in the afternoons, and 
always in the evenings, Richard gave us his company.  Although he 
was one of the most restless creatures in the world, he certainly 
was very fond of our society.

He was very, very, very fond of Ada.  I mean it, and I had better 
say it at once.  I had never seen any young people falling in love 
before, but I found them out quite soon.  I could not say so, of 
course, or show that I knew anything about it.  On the contrary, I 
was so demure and used to seem so unconscious that sometimes I 
considered within myself while I was sitting at work whether I was 
not growing quite deceitful.

But there was no help for it.  All I had to do was to be quiet, and 
I was as quiet as a mouse.  They were as quiet as mice too, so far 
as any words were concerned, but the innocent manner in which they 
relied more and more upon me as they took more and more to one 
another was so charming that I had great difficulty in not showing 
how it interested me.

"Our dear little old woman is such a capital old woman," Richard 
would say, coming up to meet me in the garden early, with his 
pleasant laugh and perhaps the least tinge of a blush, "that I 
can't get on without her.  Before I begin my harum-scarum day--
grinding away at those books and instruments and then galloping up 
hill and down dale, all the country round, like a highwayman--it 
does me so much good to come and have a steady walk with our 
comfortable friend, that here I am again!"

"You know, Dame Durden, dear," Ada would say at night, with her 
head upon my shoulder and the firelight shining in her thoughtful 
eyes, "I don't want to talk when we come upstairs here.  Only to 
sit a little while thinking, with your dear face for company, and 
to hear the wind and remember the poor sailors at sea--"

Ah!  Perhaps Richard was going to be a sailor.  We had talked it 
over very often now, and there was some talk of gratifying the 
inclination of his childhood for the sea.  Mr. Jarndyce had written 
to a relation of the family, a great Sir Leicester Dedlock, for his 
interest in Richard's favour, generally; and Sir Leicester had 
replied in a gracious manner that he would be happy to advance the 
prospects of the young gentleman if it should ever prove to be 
within his power, which was not at all probable, and that my Lady 
sent her compliments to the young gentleman (to whom she perfectly 
remembered that she was allied by remote consanguinity) and trusted 
that he would ever do his duty in any honourable profession to 
which he might devote himself.

"So I apprehend it's pretty clear," said Richard to me, "that I 
shall have to work my own way.  Never mind!  Plenty of people have 
had to do that before now, and have done it.  I only wish I had the 
command of a clipping privateer to begin with and could carry off 
the Chancellor and keep him on short allowance until he gave 
judgment in our cause.  He'd find himself growing thin, if he 
didn't look sharp!"

With a buoyancy and hopefulness and a gaiety that hardly ever 
flagged, Richard had a carelessness in his character that quite 
perplexed me, principally because he mistook it, in such a very odd 
way, for prudence.  It entered into all his calculations about 
money in a singular manner which I don't think I can better explain 
than by reverting for a moment to our loan to Mr. Skimpole.

Mr. Jarndyce had ascertained the amount, either from Mr. Skimpole 
himself or from Coavinses, and had placed the money in my hands 
with instructions to me to retain my own part of it and hand the 
rest to Richard.  The number of little acts of thoughtless 
expenditure which Richard justified by the recovery of his ten 
pounds, and the number of times he talked to me as if he had saved 
or realized that amount, would form a sum in simple addition.

"My prudent Mother Hubbard, why not?" he said to me when he wanted, 
without the least consideration, to bestow five pounds on the 
brickmaker.  "I made ten pounds, clear, out of Coavinses' 
business."

"How was that?" said I.

"Why, I got rid of ten pounds which I was quite content to get rid 
of and never expected to see any more.  You don't deny that?"

"No," said I.

"Very well!  Then I came into possession of ten pounds--"

"The same ten pounds," I hinted.

"That has nothing to do with it!" returned Richard.  "I have got 
ten pounds more than I expected to have, and consequently I can 
afford to spend it without being particular."

In exactly the same way, when he was persuaded out of the sacrifice 
of these five pounds by being convinced that it would do no good, 
he carried that sum to his credit and drew upon it.

"Let me see!" he would say.  "I saved five pounds out of the 
brickmaker's affair, so if I have a good rattle to London and back 
in a post-chaise and put that down at four pounds, I shall have 
saved one.  And it's a very good thing to save one, let me tell 
you: a penny saved is a penny got!"

I believe Richard's was as frank and generous a nature as there 
possibly can be.  He was ardent and brave, and in the midst of all 
his wild restlessness, was so gentle that I knew him like a brother 
in a few weeks.  His gentleness was natural to him and would have 
shown itself abundantly even without Ada's influence; but with it, 
he became one of the most winning of companions, always so ready to 
be interested and always so happy, sanguine, and light-hearted.  I 
am sure that I, sitting with them, and walking with them, and 
talking with them, and noticing from day to day how they went on, 
falling deeper and deeper in love, and saying nothing about it, and 
each shyly thinking that this love was the greatest of secrets, 
perhaps not yet suspected even by the other--I am sure that I was 
scarcely less enchanted than they were and scarcely less pleased 
with the pretty dream.

We were going on in this way, when one morning at breakfast Mr. 
Jarndyce received a letter, and looking at the superscription, 
said, "From Boythorn?  Aye, aye!" and opened and read it with 
evident pleasure, announcing to us in a parenthesis when he was 
about half-way through, that Boythorn was "coming down" on a visit.  
Now who was Boythorn, we all thought.  And I dare say we all 
thought too--I am sure I did, for one--would Boythorn at all 
interfere with what was going forward?

"I went to school with this fellow, Lawrence Boythorn," said Mr. 
Jarndyce, tapping the letter as he laid it on the table, "more than 
five and forty years ago.  He was then the most impetuous boy in 
the world, and he is now the most impetuous man.  He was then the 
loudest boy in the world, and he is now the loudest man.  He was 
then the heartiest and sturdiest boy in the world, and he is now 
the heartiest and sturdiest man.  He is a tremendous fellow."

"In stature, sir?" asked Richard.

"Pretty well, Rick, in that respect," said Mr. Jarndyce; "being 
some ten years older than I and a couple of inches taller, with his 
head thrown back like an old soldier, his stalwart chest squared, 
his hands like a clean blacksmith's, and his lungs!  There's no 
simile for his lungs.  Talking, laughing, or snoring, they make the 
beams of the house shake."

As Mr. Jarndyce sat enjoying the image of his friend Boythorn, we 
observed the favourable omen that there was not the least 
indication of any change in the wind.

"But it's the inside of the man, the warm heart of the man, the 
passion of the man, the fresh blood of the man, Rick--and Ada, and 
little Cobweb too, for you are all interested in a visitor--that I 
speak of," he pursued.  "His language is as sounding as his voice.  
He is always in extremes, perpetually in the superlative degree.  
In his condemnation he is all ferocity.  You might suppose him to 
be an ogre from what he says, and I believe he has the reputation 
of one with some people.  There!  I tell you no more of him 
beforehand.  You must not be surprised to see him take me under his 
protection, for he has never forgotten that I was a low boy at 
school and that our friendship began in his knocking two of my head 
tyrant's teeth out (he says six) before breakfast.  Boythorn and 
his man," to me, "will be here this afternoon, my dear."

I took care that the necessary preparations were made for Mr. 
Boythorn's reception, and we looked forward to his arrival with 
some curiosity.  The afternoon wore away, however, and he did not 
appear.  The dinner-hour arrived, and still he did not appear.  The 
dinner was put back an hour, and we were sitting round the fire 
with no light but the blaze when the hall-door suddenly burst open 
and the hall resounded with these words, uttered with the greatest 
vehemence and in a stentorian tone: "We have been misdirected, 
Jarndyce, by a most abandoned ruffian, who told us to take the 
turning to the right instead of to the left.  He is the most 
intolerable scoundrel on the face of the earth.  His father must 
have been a most consummate villain, ever to have such a son.  I 
would have had that fellow shot without the least remorse!"

"Did he do it on purpose?" Mr. Jarndyce inquired.

"I have not the slightest doubt that the scoundrel has passed his 
whole existence in misdirecting travellers!" returned the other.  
"By my soul, I thought him the worst-looking dog I had ever beheld 
when he was telling me to take the turning to the right.  And yet I 
stood before that fellow face to face and didn't knock his brains 
out!"

"Teeth, you mean?" said Mr. Jarndyce.

"Ha, ha, ha!" laughed Mr. Lawrence Boythorn, really making the 
whole house vibrate.  "What, you have not forgotten it yet!  Ha, 
ha, ha!  And that was another most consummate vagabond!  By my 
soul, the countenance of that fellow when he was a boy was the 
blackest image of perfidy, cowardice, and cruelty ever set up as a 
scarecrow in a field of scoundrels.  If I were to meet that most 
unparalleled despot in the streets to-morrow, I would fell him like 
a rotten tree!"

"I have no doubt of it," said Mr. Jarndyce.  "Now, will you come 
upstairs?"

"By my soul, Jarndyce," returned his guest, who seemed to refer to 
his watch, "if you had been married, I would have turned back at 
the garden-gate and gone away to the remotest summits of the 
Himalaya Mountains sooner than I would have presented myself at 
this unseasonable hour."

"Not quite so far, I hope?" said Mr. Jarndyce.

"By my life and honour, yes!" cried the visitor.  "I wouldn't be 
guilty of the audacious insolence of keeping a lady of the house 
waiting all this time for any earthly consideration.  I would 
infinitely rather destroy myself--infinitely rather!"

Talking thus, they went upstairs, and presently we heard him in his 
bedroom thundering "Ha, ha, ha!" and again "Ha, ha, ha!" until the 
flattest echo in the neighbourhood seemed to catch the contagion 
and to laugh as enjoyingly as he did or as we did when we heard him 
laugh.

We all conceived a prepossession in his favour, for there was a 
sterling quality in this laugh, and in his vigorous, healthy voice, 
and in the roundness and fullness with which he uttered every word 
he spoke, and in the very fury of his superlatives, which seemed to 
go off like blank cannons and hurt nothing.  But we were hardly 
prepared to have it so confirmed by his appearance when Mr. 
Jarndyce presented him.  He was not only a very handsome old 
gentleman--upright and stalwart as he had been described to us--
with a massive grey head, a fine composure of face when silent, a 
figure that might have become corpulent but for his being so 
continually in earnest that he gave it no rest, and a chin that 
might have subsided into a double chin but for the vehement 
emphasis in which it was constantly required to assist; but he was 
such a true gentleman in his manner, so chivalrously polite, his 
face was lighted by a smile of so much sweetness and tenderness, 
and it seemed so plain that he had nothing to hide, but showed 
himself exactly as he was--incapable, as Richard said, of anything 
on a limited scale, and firing away with those blank great guns 
because he carried no small arms whatever--that really I could not 
help looking at him with equal pleasure as he sat at dinner, 
whether he smilingly conversed with Ada and me, or was led by Mr. 
Jarndyce into some great volley of superlatives, or threw up his 
head like a bloodhound and gave out that tremendous "Ha, ha, ha!"

"You have brought your bird with you, I suppose?" said Mr. 
Jarndyce.

"By heaven, he is the most astonishing bird in Europe!" replied the 
other.  "He IS the most wonderful creature!  I wouldn't take ten 
thousand guineas for that bird.  I have left an annuity for his 
sole support in case he should outlive me.  He is, in sense and 
attachment, a phenomenon.  And his father before him was one of the 
most astonishing birds that ever lived!"

The subject of this laudation was a very little canary, who was so 
tame that he was brought down by Mr. Boythorn's man, on his 
forefinger, and after taking a gentle flight round the room, 
alighted on his master's head.  To hear Mr. Boythorn presently 
expressing the most implacable and passionate sentiments, with this 
fragile mite of a creature quietly perched on his forehead, was to 
have a good illustration of his character, I thought.

"By my soul, Jarndyce," he said, very gently holding up a bit of 
bread to the canary to peck at, "if I were in your place I would 
seize every master in Chancery by the throat tomorrow morning and 
shake him until his money rolled out of his pockets and his bones 
rattled in his skin.  I would have a settlement out of somebody, by 
fair means or by foul.  If you would empower me to do it, I would 
do it for you with the greatest satisfaction!"  (All this time the 
very small canary was eating out of his hand.)

"I thank you, Lawrence, but the suit is hardly at such a point at 
present," returned Mr. Jarndyce, laughing, "that it would be 
greatly advanced even by the legal process of shaking the bench and 
the whole bar."

"There never was such an infernal cauldron as that Chancery on the 
face of the earth!" said Mr. Boythorn.  "Nothing but a mine below 
it on a busy day in term time, with all its records, rules, and 
precedents collected in it and every functionary belonging to it 
also, high and low, upward and downward, from its son the 
Accountant-General to its father the Devil, and the whole blown to 
atoms with ten thousand hundredweight of gunpowder, would reform it 
in the least!"

It was impossible not to laugh at the energetic gravity with which 
he recommended this strong measure of reform.  When we laughed, he 
threw up his head and shook his broad chest, and again the whole 
country seemed to echo to his "Ha, ha, ha!"  It had not the least 
effect in disturbing the bird, whose sense of security was complete 
and who hopped about the table with its quick head now on this side 
and now on that, turning its bright sudden eye on its master as if 
he were no more than another bird.

"But how do you and your neighbour get on about the disputed right 
of way?" said Mr. Jarndyce.  "You are not free from the toils of 
the law yourself!"

"The fellow has brought actions against ME for trespass, and I have 
brought actions against HIM for trespass," returned Mr. Boythorn.  
"By heaven, he is the proudest fellow breathing.  It is morally 
impossible that his name can be Sir Leicester.  It must be Sir 
Lucifer."

"Complimentary to our distant relation!" said my guardian 
laughingly to Ada and Richard.

"I would beg Miss Clare's pardon and Mr. Carstone's pardon," 
resumed our visitor, "if I were not reassured by seeing in the fair 
face of the lady and the smile of the gentleman that it is quite 
unnecessary and that they keep their distant relation at a 
comfortable distance."

"Or he keeps us," suggested Richard.

"By my soul," exclaimed Mr. Boythorn, suddenly firing another 
volley, "that fellow is, and his father was, and his grandfather 
was, the most stiff-necked, arrogant imbecile, pig-headed numskull, 
ever, by some inexplicable mistake of Nature, born in any station 
of life but a walking-stick's!  The whole of that family are the 
most solemnly conceited and consummate blockheads!  But it's no 
matter; he should not shut up my path if he were fifty baronets 
melted into one and living in a hundred Chesney Wolds, one within 
another, like the ivory balls in a Chinese carving.  The fellow, by 
his agent, or secretary, or somebody, writes to me 'Sir Leicester 
Dedlock, Baronet, presents his compliments to Mr. Lawrence 
Boythorn, and has to call his attention to the fact that the green 
pathway by the old parsonage-house, now the property of Mr. 
Lawrence Boythorn, is Sir Leicester's right of way, being in fact a 
portion of the park of chesney Wold, and that Sir Leicester finds 
it convenient to close up the same.'  I write to the fellow, 'Mr. 
Lawrence Boythorn presents his compliments to Sir Leicester 
Dedlock, Baronet, and has to call HIS attention to the fact that he 
totally denies the whole of Sir Leicester Dedlock's positions on 
every possible subject and has to add, in reference to closing up 
the pathway, that he will be glad to see the man who may undertake 
to do it.'  The fellow sends a most abandoned villain with one eye 
to construct a gateway.  I play upon that execrable scoundrel with 
a fire-engine until the breath is nearly driven out of his body.  
The fellow erects a gate in the night.  I chop it down and burn it 
in the morning.  He sends his myrmidons to come over the fence and 
pass and repass.  I catch them in humane man traps, fire split peas 
at their legs, play upon them with the engine--resolve to free 
mankind from the insupportable burden of the existence of those 
lurking ruffians.  He brings actions for trespass; I bring actions 
for trespass.  He brings actions for assault and battery; I defend 
them and continue to assault and batter.  Ha, ha, ha!"

To hear him say all this with unimaginable energy, one might have 
thought him the angriest of mankind.  To see him at the very same 
time, looking at the bird now perched upon his thumb and softly 
smoothing its feathers with his forefinger, one might have thought 
him the gentlest.  To hear him laugh and see the broad good nature 
of his face then, one might have supposed that he had not a care in 
the world, or a dispute, or a dislike, but that his whole existence 
was a summer joke.

"No, no," he said, "no closing up of my paths by any Dedlock!  
Though I willingly confess," here he softened in a moment, "that 
Lady Dedlock is the most accomplished lady in the world, to whom I 
would do any homage that a plain gentleman, and no baronet with a 
head seven hundred years thick, may.  A man who joined his regiment 
at twenty and within a week challenged the most imperious and 
presumptuous coxcomb of a commanding officer that ever drew the 
breath of life through a tight waist--and got broke for it--is not 
the man to be walked over by all the Sir Lucifers, dead or alive, 
locked or unlocked.  Ha, ha, ha!"

"Nor the man to allow his junior to be walked over either?" said my 
guardian.

"Most assuredly not!" said Mr. Boythorn, clapping him on the 
shoulder with an air of protection that had something serious in 
it, though he laughed.  "He will stand by the low boy, always.  
Jarndyce, you may rely upon him!  But speaking of this trespass--
with apologies to Miss Clare and Miss Summerson for the length at 
which I have pursued so dry a subject--is there nothing for me from 
your men Kenge and Carboy?"

"I think not, Esther?" said Mr. Jarndyce.

"Nothing, guardian."

"Much obliged!" said Mr. Boythorn.  "Had no need to ask, after even 
my slight experience of Miss Summerson's forethought for every one 
about her."  (They all encouraged me; they were determined to do 
it.)  "I inquired because, coming from Lincolnshire, I of course 
have not yet been in town, and I thought some letters might have 
been sent down here.  I dare say they will report progress to-
morrow morning."

I saw him so often in the course of the evening, which passed very 
pleasantly, contemplate Richard and Ada with an interest and a 
satisfaction that made his fine face remarkably agreeable as he sat 
at a little distance from the piano listening to the music--and he 
had small occasion to tell us that he was passionately fond of 
music, for his face showed it--that I asked my guardian as we sat 
at the backgammon board whether Mr. Boythorn had ever been married.

"No," said he.  "No."

"But he meant to be!" said I.

"How did you find out that?" he returned with a smile.  "Why, 
guardian," I explained, not without reddening a little at hazarding 
what was in my thoughts, "there is something so tender in his 
manner, after all, and he is so very courtly and gentle to us, and
--"

Mr. Jarndyce directed his eyes to where he was sitting as I have 
just described him.

I said no more.

"You are right, little woman," he answered.  "He was all but 
married once.  Long ago.  And once."

"Did the lady die?"

"No--but she died to him.  That time has had its influence on all 
his later life.  Would you suppose him to have a head and a heart 
full of romance yet?"

"I think, guardian, I might have supposed so.  But it is easy to 
say that when you have told me so."

"He has never since been what he might have been," said Mr. 
Jarndyce, "and now you see him in his age with no one near him but 
his servant and his little yellow friend.  It's your throw, my 
dear!"

I felt, from my guardian's manner, that beyond this point I could 
not pursue the subject without changing the wind.  I therefore 
forbore to ask any further questions.  I was interested, but not 
curious.  I thought a little while about this old love story in the 
night, when I was awakened by Mr. Boythorn's lusty snoring; and I 
tried to do that very difficult thing, imagine old people young 
again and invested with the graces of youth.  But I fell asleep 
before I had succeeded, and dreamed of the days when I lived in my 
godmother's house.  I am not sufficiently acquainted with such 
subjects to know whether it is at all remarkable that I almost 
always dreamed of that period of my life.

With the morning there came a letter from Messrs. Kenge and Carboy 
to Mr. Boythorn informing him that one of their clerks would wait 
upon him at noon.  As it was the day of the week on which I paid the 
bills, and added up my books, and made all the household affairs as 
compact as possible, I remained at home while Mr. Jarndyce, Ada, and 
Richard took advantage of a very fine day to make a little 
excursion, Mr. Boythorn was to wait for Kenge and Carboy's clerk and 
then was to go on foot to meet them on their return.

Well!  I was full of business, examining tradesmen's books, adding 
up columns, paying money, filing receipts, and I dare say making a 
great bustle about it when Mr. Guppy was announced and shown in.  I 
had had some idea that the clerk who was to be sent down might be 
the young gentleman who had met me at the coach-office, and I was 
glad to see him, because he was associated with my present 
happiness.

I scarcely knew him again, he was so uncommonly smart.  He had an 
entirely new suit of glossy clothes on, a shining hat, lilac-kid 
gloves, a neckerchief of a variety of colours, a large hot-house 
flower in his button-hole, and a thick gold ring on his little 
finger.  Besides which, he quite scented the dining-room with 
bear's-grease and other perfumery.  He looked at me with an 
attention that quite confused me when I begged him to take a seat 
until the servant should return; and as he sat there crossing and 
uncrossing his legs in a corner, and I asked him if he had had a 
pleasant ride, and hoped that Mr. Kenge was well, I never looked at 
him, but I found him looking at me in the same scrutinizing and 
curious way.

When the request was brought to him that he would go up-stairs to 
Mr. Boythorn's room, I mentioned that he would find lunch prepared 
for him when he came down, of which Mr. Jarndyce hoped he would 
partake.  He said with some embarrassment, holding the handle of the 
door, '"Shall I have the honour of finding you here, miss?"  I 
replied yes, I should be there; and he went out with a bow and 
another look.

I thought him only awkward and shy, for he was evidently much 
embarrassed; and I fancied that the best thing I could do would be 
to wait until I saw that he had everything he wanted and then to 
leave him to himself.  The lunch was soon brought, but it remained 
for some time on the table.  The interview with Mr. Boythorn was a 
long one, and a stormy one too, I should think, for although his 
room was at some distance I heard his loud voice rising every now 
and then like a high wind, and evidently blowing perfect broadsides 
of denunciation.

At last Mr. Guppy came back, looking something the worse for the 
conference.  "My eye, miss," he said in a low voice, "he's a 
Tartar!"

"Pray take some refreshment, sir," said I.

Mr. Guppy sat down at the table and began nervously sharpening the 
carving-knife on the carving-fork, still looking at me (as I felt 
quite sure without looking at him) in the same unusual manner.  The 
sharpening lasted so long that at last I felt a kind of obligation 
on me to raise my eyes in order that I might break the spell under 
which he seemed to labour, of not being able to leave off.

He immediately looked at the dish and began to carve.

"What will you take yourself, miss?  You'll take a morsel of 
something?"

"No, thank you," said I.

"Shan't I give you a piece of anything at all, miss?" said Mr. 
Guppy, hurriedly drinking off a glass of wine.

"Nothing, thank you," said I.  "I have only waited to see that you 
have everything you want.  Is there anything I can order for you?"

"No, I am much obliged to you, miss, I'm sure.  I've everything that 
I can require to make me comfortable--at least I--not comfortable--
I'm never that."  He drank off two more glasses of wine, one after 
another.

I thought I had better go.

"I beg your pardon, miss!" said Mr. Guppy, rising when he saw me 
rise.  "But would you allow me the favour of a minute's private 
conversation?"

Not knowing what to say, I sat down again.

"What follows is without prejudice, miss?" said Mr. Guppy, anxiously 
bringing a chair towards my table.

"I don't understand what you mean," said I, wondering.

"It's one of our law terms, miss.  You won't make any use of it to 
my detriment at Kenge and Carboy's or elsewhere.  If our 
conversation shouldn't lead to anything, I am to be as I was and am 
not to be prejudiced in my situation or worldly prospects.  In 
short, it's in total confidence."

"I am at a loss, sir," said I, "to imagine what you can have to 
communicate in total confidence to me, whom you have never seen but 
once; but I should be very sorry to do you any injury."

"Thank you, miss.  I'm sure of it--that's quite sufficient."  All 
this time Mr. Guppy was either planing his forehead with his 
handkerchief or tightly rubbing the palm of his left hand with the 
palm of his right.  "If you would excuse my taking another glass of 
wine, miss, I think it might assist me in getting on without a 
continual choke that cannot fail to be mutually unpleasant."

He did so, and came back again.  I took the opportunity of moving 
well behind my table.

"You wouldn't allow me to offer you one, would you miss?" said Mr. 
Guppy, apparently refreshed.

"Not any," said I.

"Not half a glass?" said Mr. Guppy.  "Quarter?  No!  Then, to 
proceed.  My present salary, Miss Summerson, at Kenge and Carboy's, 
is two pound a week.  When I first had the happiness of looking upon 
you, it was one fifteen, and had stood at that figure for a 
lengthened period.  A rise of five has since taken place, and a 
further rise of five is guaranteed at the expiration of a term not 
exceeding twelve months from the present date.  My mother has a 
little property, which takes the form of a small life annuity, upon 
which she lives in an independent though unassuming manner in the 
Old Street Road.  She is eminently calculated for a mother-in-law.  
She never interferes, is all for peace, and her disposition easy.  
She has her failings--as who has not?--but I never knew her do it 
when company was present, at which time you may freely trust her 
with wines, spirits, or malt liquors.  My own abode is lodgings at 
Penton Place, Pentonville.  It is lowly, but airy, open at the back, 
and considered one of the 'ealthiest outlets.  Miss Summerson!  In 
the mildest language, I adore you.  Would you be so kind as to allow 
me (as I may say) to file a declaration--to make an offer!"

Mr. Guppy went down on his knees.  I was well behind my table and 
not much frightened.  I said, "Get up from that ridiculous position 
lmmediately, sir, or you will oblige me to break my implied promise 
and ring the bell!"

"Hear me out, miss!" said Mr. Guppy, folding his hands.

"I cannot consent to hear another word, sir," I returned, "Unless 
you get up from the carpet directly and go and sit down at the table 
as you ought to do if you have any sense at all."

He looked piteously, but slowly rose and did so.

"Yet what a mockery it is, miss," he said with his hand upon his 
heart and shaking his head at me in a melancholy manner over the 
tray, "to be stationed behind food at such a moment.  The soul 
recoils from food at such a moment, miss."

"I beg you to conclude," said I; "you have asked me to hear you out, 
and I beg you to conclude."

"I will, miss," said Mr. Guppy.  "As I love and honour, so likewise 
I obey.  Would that I could make thee the subject of that vow before 
the shrine!"

"That is quite impossible," said I, "and entirely out of the 
question."

"I am aware," said Mr. Guppy, leaning forward over the tray and 
regarding me, as I again strangely felt, though my eyes were not 
directed to him, with his late intent look, "I am aware that in a 
worldly point of view, according to all appearances, my offer is a 
poor one.  But, Miss Summerson!  Angel!  No, don't ring--I have been 
brought up in a sharp school and am accustomed to a variety of 
general practice.  Though a young man, I have ferreted out evidence, 
got up cases, and seen lots of life.  Blest with your hand, what 
means might I not find of advancing your interests and pushing your 
fortunes!  What might I not get to know, nearly concerning you?  I 
know nothing now, certainly; but what MIGHT I not if I had your 
confidence, and you set me on?"

I told him that he addressed my interest or what he supposed to be 
my interest quite as unsuccessfully as he addressed my inclination, 
and he would now understand that I requested him, if he pleased, to 
go away immediately.

"Cruel miss," said Mr. Guppy, "hear but another word!  I think you 
must have seen that I was struck with those charms on the day when I 
waited at the Whytorseller.  I think you must have remarked that I 
could not forbear a tribute to those charms when I put up the steps 
of the 'ackney-coach.  It was a feeble tribute to thee, but it was 
well meant.  Thy image has ever since been fixed in my breast.  I 
have walked up and down of an evening opposite Jellyby's house only 
to look upon the bricks that once contained thee.  This out of to-
day, quite an unnecessary out so far as the attendance, which was 
its pretended object, went, was planned by me alone for thee alone.  
If I speak of interest, it is only to recommend myself and my 
respectful wretchedness.  Love was before it, and is before it."

"I should be pained, Mr. Guppy," said I, rising and putting my hand 
upon the bell-rope, "to do you or any one who was sincere the 
injustice of slighting any honest feeling, however disagreeably 
expressed.  If you have really meant to give me a proof of your good 
opinion, though ill-timed and misplaced, I feel that I ought to 
thank you.  I have very little reason to be proud, and I am not 
proud.  I hope," I think I added, without very well knowing what I 
said, "that you will now go away as if you had never been so 
exceedingly foolish and attend to Messrs. Kenge and Carboy's 
business."

"Half a minute, miss!" cried Mr. Guppy, checking me as I was about 
to ring.  "This has been without prejudice?"

"I will never mention it," said I, "unless you should give me future 
occasion to do so."

"A quarter of a minute, miss!  In case you should think better at 
any time, however distant--THAT'S no consequence, for my feelings 
can never alter--of anything I have said, particularly what might I 
not do, Mr. William Guppy, eighty-seven, Penton Place, or if 
removed, or dead (of blighted hopes or anything of that sort), care 
of Mrs. Guppy, three hundred and two, Old Street Road, will be 
sufficient."

I rang the bell, the servant came, and Mr. Guppy, laying his written 
card upon the table and making a dejected bow, departed.  Raising my 
eyes as he went out, I once more saw him looking at me after he had 
passed the door.

I sat there for another hour or more, finishing my books and 
payments and getting through plenty of business.  Then I arranged my 
desk, and put everything away, and was so composed and cheerful that 
I thought I had quite dismissed this unexpected incident.  But, when 
I went upstairs to my own room, I surprised myself by beginning to 
laugh about it and then surprised myself still more by beginning to 
cry about it.  In short, I was in a flutter for a little while and 
felt as if an old chord had been more coarsely touched than it ever 
had been since the days of the dear old doll, long buried in the 
garden.



CHAPTER X

The Law-Writer


On the eastern borders of Chancery Lane, that is to say, more 
particularly in Cook's Court, Cursitor Street, Mr. Snagsby, law-
stationer, pursues his lawful calling.  In the shade of Cook's 
Court, at most times a shady place, Mr. Snagsby has dealt in all 
sorts of blank forms of legal process; in skins and rolls of 
parchment; in paper--foolscap, brief, draft, brown, white, whitey-
brown, and blotting; in stamps; in office-quills, pens, ink, India-
rubber, pounce, pins, pencils, sealing-wax, and wafers; in red tape 
and green ferret; in pocket-books, almanacs, diaries, and law lists; 
in string boxes, rulers, inkstands--glass and leaden--pen-knives, 
scissors, bodkins, and other small office-cutlery; in short, in 
articles too numerous to mention, ever since he was out of his time 
and went into partnership with Peffer.  On that occasion, Cook's 
Court was in a manner revolutionized by the new inscription in fresh 
paint, PEFFER AND SNAGSBY, displacing the time-honoured and not 
easily to be deciphered legend PEFFER only.  For smoke, which is the 
London ivy, had so wreathed itself round Peffer's name and clung to 
his dwelling-place that the affectionate parasite quite overpowered 
the parent tree.

Peffer is never seen in Cook's Court now.  He is not expected there, 
for he has been recumbent this quarter of a century in the 
churchyard of St. Andrews, Holborn, with the waggons and hackney-
coaches roaring past him all the day and half the night like one 
great dragon.  If he ever steal forth when the dragon is at rest to 
air himself again in Cook's Court until admonished to return by the 
crowing of the sanguine cock in the cellar at the little dairy in 
Cursitor Street, whose ideas of daylight it would be curious to 
ascertain, since he knows from his personal observation next to 
nothing about it--if Peffer ever do revisit the pale glimpses of 
Cook's Court, which no law-stationer in the trade can positively 
deny, he comes invisibly, and no one is the worse or wiser.

In his lifetime, and likewise in the period of Snagsby's "time" of 
seven long years, there dwelt with Peffer in the same law-
stationering premises a niece--a short, shrewd niece, something too 
violently compressed about the waist, and with a sharp nose like a 
sharp autumn evening, inclining to be frosty towards the end.  The 
Cook's Courtiers had a rumour flying among them that the mother of 
this niece did, in her daughter's childhood, moved by too jealous a 
solicitude that her figure should approach perfection, lace her up 
every morning with her maternal foot against the bed-post for a 
stronger hold and purchase; and further, that she exhibited 
internally pints of vinegar and lemon-juice, which acids, they held, 
had mounted to the nose and temper of the patient.  With whichsoever 
of the many tongues of Rumour this frothy report originated, it 
either never reached or never influenced the ears of young Snagsby, 
who, having wooed and won its fair subject on his arrival at man's 
estate, entered into two partnerships at once.  So now, in Cook's 
Court, Cursitor Street, Mr. Snagsby and the niece are one; and the 
niece still cherishes her figure, which, however tastes may differ, 
is unquestionably so far precious that there is mighty little of it.

Mr. and Mrs. Snagsby are not only one bone and one flesh, but, to 
the neighbours' thinking, one voice too.  That voice, appearing to 
proceed from Mrs. Snagsby alone, is heard in Cook's Court very 
often.  Mr. Snagsby, otherwise than as he finds expression through 
these dulcet tones, is rarely heard.  He is a mild, bald, timid man 
with a shining head and a scrubby clump of black hair sticking out 
at the back.  He tends to meekness and obesity.  As he stands at his 
door in Cook's Court in his grey shop-coat and black calico sleeves, 
looking up at the clouds, or stands behind a desk in his dark shop 
with a heavy flat ruler, snipping and slicing at sheepskin in 
company with his two 'prentices, he is emphatically a retiring and 
unassuming man.  From beneath his feet, at such times, as from a 
shrill ghost unquiet in its grave, there frequently arise 
complainings and lamentations in the voice already mentioned; and 
haply, on some occasions when these reach a sharper pitch than 
usual, Mr. Snagsby mentions to the 'prentices, "I think my little 
woman is a-giving it to Guster!"

This proper name, so used by Mr. Snagsby, has before now sharpened 
the wit of the Cook's Courtiers to remark that it ought to be the 
name of Mrs. Snagsby, seeing that she might with great force and 
expression be termed a Guster, in compliment to her stormy 
character.  It is, however, the possession, and the only possession 
except fifty shillings per annum and a very small box indifferently 
filled with clothing, of a lean young woman from a workhouse (by 
some supposed to have been christened Augusta) who, although she was 
farmed or contracted for during her growing time by an amiable 
benefactor of his species resident at Tooting, and cannot fail to 
have been developed under the most favourable circumstances, "has 
fits," which the parish can't account for.

Guster, really aged three or four and twenty, but looking a round 
ten years older, goes cheap with this unaccountable drawback of 
fits, and is so apprehensive of being returned on the hands of her 
patron saint that except when she is found with her head in the 
pail, or the sink, or the copper, or the dinner, or anything else 
that happens to be near her at the time of her seizure, she is 
always at work.  She is a satisfaction to the parents and guardians 
of the 'prentices, who feel that there is little danger of her 
inspiring tender emotions in the breast of youth; she is a 
satisfaction to Mrs. Snagsby, who can always find fault with her; 
she is a satisfaction to Mr. Snagsby, who thinks it a charity to 
keep her.  The law-stationer's establishment is, in Guster's eyes, a 
temple of plenty and splendour.  She believes the little drawing-
room upstairs, always kept, as one may say, with its hair in papers 
and its pinafore on, to be the most elegant apartment in 
Christendom.  The view it commands of Cook's Court at one end (not 
to mention a squint into Cursitor Street) and of Coavinses' the 
sheriff's officer's backyard at the other she regards as a prospect 
of unequalled beauty.  The portraits it displays in oil--and plenty 
of it too--of Mr. Snagsby looking at Mrs. Snagsby and of Mrs. 
Snagsby looking at Mr. Snagsby are in her eyes as achievements of 
Raphael or Titian.  Guster has some recompenses for her many 
privations.

Mr. Snagsby refers everything not in the practical mysteries of the 
business to Mrs. Snagsby.  She manages the money, reproaches the 
tax-gatherers, appoints the times and places of devotion on Sundays, 
licenses Mr. Snagsby's entertainments, and acknowledges no 
responsibility as to what she thinks fit to provide for dinner, 
insomuch that she is the high standard of comparison among the 
neighbouring wives a long way down Chancery Lane on both sides, and 
even out in Holborn, who in any domestic passages of arms habitually 
call upon their husbands to look at the difference between their 
(the wives') position and Mrs. Snagsby's, and their (the husbands') 
behaviour and Mr. Snagsby's.  Rumour, always flying bat-like about 
Cook's Court and skimming in and out at everybody's windows, does 
say that Mrs. Snagsby is jealous and inquisitive and that Mr. 
Snagsby is sometimes worried out of house and home, and that if he 
had the spirit of a mouse he wouldn't stand it.  It is even observed 
that the wives who quote him to their self-willed husbands as a 
shining example in reality look down upon him and that nobody does 
so with greater superciliousness than one particular lady whose lord 
is more than suspected of laying his umbrella on her as an 
instrument of correction.  But these vague whisperings may arise 
from Mr. Snagsby's being in his way rather a meditative and poetical 
man, loving to walk in Staple Inn in the summer-time and to observe 
how countrified the sparrows and the leaves are, also to lounge 
about the Rolls Yard of a Sunday afternoon and to remark (if in good 
spirits) that there were old times once and that you'd find a stone 
coffin or two now under that chapel, he'll be bound, if you was to 
dig for it.  He solaces his imagination, too, by thinking of the 
many Chancellors and Vices, and Masters of the Rolls who are 
deceased; and he gets such a flavour of the country out of telling 
the two 'prentices how he HAS heard say that a brook "as clear as 
crystial" once ran right down the middle of Holborn, when Turnstile 
really was a turnstile, leading slap away into the meadows--gets 
such a flavour of the country out of this that he never wants to go 
there.

The day is closing in and the gas is lighted, but is not yet fully 
effective, for it is not quite dark.  Mr. Snagsby standing at his 
shop-door looking up at the clouds sees a crow who is out late skim 
westward over the slice of sky belonging to Cook's Court.  The crow 
flies straight across Chancery Lane and Lincoln's Inn Garden into 
Lincoln's Inn Fields.

Here, in a large house, formerly a house of state, lives Mr. 
Tulkinghorn.  It is let off in sets of chambers now, and in those 
shrunken fragments of its greatness, lawyers lie like maggots in 
nuts.  But its roomy staircases, passages, and antechambers still 
remain; and even its painted ceilings, where Allegory, in Roman 
helmet and celestial linen, sprawls among balustrades and pillars, 
flowers, clouds, and big-legged boys, and makes the head ache--as 
would seem to be Allegory's object always, more or less.  Here, 
among his many boxes labelled with transcendent names, lives Mr. 
Tulkinghorn, when not speechlessly at home in country-houses where 
the great ones of the earth are bored to death.  Here he is to-day, 
quiet at his table.  An oyster of the old school whom nobody can 
open.

Like as he is to look at, so is his apartment in the dusk of the 
present afternoon.  Rusty, out of date, withdrawing from attention, 
able to afford it.  Heavy, broad-backed, old-fashioned, mahogany-
and-horsehair chairs, not easily lifted; obsolete tables with 
spindle-legs and dusty baize covers; presentation prints of the 
holders of great titles in the last generation or the last but one, 
environ him.  A thick and dingy Turkey-carpet muffles the floor 
where he sits, attended by two candles in old-fashioned silver 
candlesticks that give a very insufficient light to his large room.  
The titles on the backs of his books have retired into the binding; 
everything that can have a lock has got one; no key is visible.  
Very few loose papers are about.  He has some manuscript near him, 
but is not referring to it.  With the round top of an inkstand and 
two broken bits of sealing-wax he is silently and slowly working out 
whatever train of indecision is in his mind.  Now tbe inkstand top 
is in the middle, now the red bit of sealing-wax, now the black bit.  
That's not it.  Mr. Tulkinghorn must gather them all up and begin 
again.

Here, beneath the painted ceiling, with foreshortened Allegory 
staring down at his intrusion as if it meant to swoop upon him, and 
he cutting it dead, Mr. Tulkinghorn has at once his house and 
office.  He keeps no staff, only one middle-aged man, usually a 
little out at elbows, who sits in a high pew in the hall and is 
rarely overburdened with business.  Mr. Tulkinghorn is not in a 
common way.  He wants no clerks.  He is a great reservoir of 
confidences, not to be so tapped.  His clients want HIM; he is all 
in all.  Drafts that he requires to be drawn are drawn by special-
pleaders in the temple on mysterious instructions; fair copies that 
he requires to be made are made at the stationers', expense being no 
consideration.  The middle-aged man in the pew knows scarcely more 
of the affairs of the peerage than any crossing-sweeper in Holborn.

The red bit, the black bit, the inkstand top, the other inkstand 
top, the little sand-box.  So!  You to the middle, you to the right, 
you to the left.  This train of indecision must surely be worked out 
now or never.  Now!  Mr. Tulkinghorn gets up, adjusts his 
spectacles, puts on his hat, puts the manuscript in his pocket, goes 
out, tells the middle-aged man out at elbows, "I shall be back 
presently."  Very rarely tells him anything more explicit.

Mr. Tulkinghorn goes, as the crow came--not quite so straight, but 
nearly--to Cook's Court, Cursitor Street.  To Snagsby's, Law-
Stationer's, Deeds engrossed and copied, Law-Writing executed in all 
its branches, &c., &c., &c.

It is somewhere about five or six o'clock in the afternoon, and a 
balmy fragrance of warm tea hovers in Cook's Court.  It hovers about 
Snagsby's door.  The hours are early there: dinner at half-past one 
and supper at half-past nine.  Mr. Snagsby was about to descend into 
the subterranean regions to take tea when he looked out of his door 
just now and saw the crow who was out late.

"Master at home?"

Guster is minding the shop, for the 'prentices take tea in the 
kitchen with Mr. and Mrs. Snagsby; consequently, the robe-maker's 
two daughters, combing their curls at the two glasses in the two 
second-floor windows of the opposite house, are not driving the two 
'prentices to distraction as they fondly suppose, but are merely 
awakening the unprofitable admiration of Guster, whose hair won't 
grow, and never would, and it is confidently thought, never will.

"Master at home?" says Mr. Tulkinghorn.

Master is at home, and Guster will fetch him.  Guster disappears, 
glad to get out of the shop, which she regards with mingled dread 
and veneration as a storehouse of awful implements of the great 
torture of the law--a place not to be entered after the gas is 
turned off.

Mr. Snagsby appears, greasy, warm, herbaceous, and chewing.  Bolts a 
bit of bread and butter.  Says, "Bless my soul, sir!  Mr. 
Tulkinghorn!"

"I want half a word with you, Snagsby."

"Certainly, sir!  Dear me, sir, why didn't you send your young man 
round for me?  Pray walk into the back shop, sir."  Snagsby has 
brightened in a moment.

The confined room, strong of parchment-grease, is warehouse, 
counting-house, and copying-office.  Mr. Tulkinghorn sits, facing 
round, on a stool at the desk.

"Jarndyce and Jarndyce, Snagsby."

"Yes, sir."  Mr. Snagsby turns up the gas and coughs behind his 
hand, modestly anticipating profit.  Mr. Snagsby, as a timid man, is 
accustomed to cough with a variety of expressions, and so to save 
words.

"You copied some affidavits in that cause for me lately."

"Yes, sir, we did."

"There was one of them," says Mr. Tulkinghorn, carelessly feeling--
tight, unopenable oyster of the old school!--in the wrong coat-
pocket, "the handwriting of which is peculiar, and I rather like.  
As I happened to be passing, and thought I had it about me, I looked 
in to ask you--but I haven't got it.  No matter, any other time will 
do.  Ah! here it is!  I looked in to ask you who copied this."

'"Who copied this, sir?" says Mr. Snagsby, taking it, laying it flat 
on the desk, and separating all the sheets at once with a twirl and 
a twist of the left hand peculiar to lawstationers.  "We gave this 
out, sir.  We were giving out rather a large quantity of work just 
at that time.  I can tell you in a moment who copied it, sir, by 
referring to my book."

Mr. Snagsby takes his book down from the safe, makes another bolt of 
the bit of bread and butter which seemed to have stopped short, eyes 
the affidavit aside, and brings his right forefinger travelling down 
a page of the book, "Jewby--Packer--Jarndyce."

"Jarndyce!  Here we are, sir," says Mr. Snagsby.  "To be sure!  I 
might have remembered it.  This was given out, sir, to a writer who 
lodges just over on the opposite side of the lane."

Mr. Tulkinghorn has seen the entry, found it before the law-
stationer, read it while the forefinger was coming down the hill.

"WHAT do you call him?  Nemo?" says Mr. Tulkinghorn.  "Nemo, sir.  
Here it is.  Forty-two folio.  Given out on the Wednesday night at 
eight o'clock, brought in on the Thursday morning at half after 
nine."

"Nemo!" repeats Mr. Tulkinghorn.  "Nemo is Latin for no one."

"It must be English for some one, sir, I think," Mr. Snagsby submits 
with his deferential cough.  "It is a person's name.  Here it is, 
you see, sir!  Forty-two folio.  Given out Wednesday night, eight 
o'clock; brought in Thursday morning, half after nine."

The tail of Mr. Snagsby's eye becomes conscious of the head of Mrs. 
Snagsby looking in at the shop-door to know what he means by 
deserting his tea.  Mr. Snagsby addresses an explanatory cough to 
Mrs. Snagsby, as who should say, "My dear, a customer!"

"Half after nine, sir," repeats Mr. Snagsby.  "Our law-writers, who 
live by job-work, are a queer lot; and this may not be his name, but 
it's the name he goes by.  I remember now, sir, that he gives it in 
a written advertisement he sticks up down at the Rule Office, and 
the King's Bench Office, and the Judges' Chambers, and so forth.  
You know the kind of document, sir--wanting employ?"

Mr. Tulkinghorn glances through the little window at the back of 
Coavinses', the sheriff's officer's, where lights shine in 
Coavinses' windows.  Coavinses' coffee-room is at the back, and the 
shadows of several gentlemen under a cloud loom cloudily upon the 
blinds.  Mr. Snagsby takes the opportunity of slightly turning his 
head to glance over his shoulder at his little woman and to make 
apologetic motions with his mouth to this effect: "Tul-king-horn--
rich--in-flu-en-tial!"

"Have you given this man work before?" asks Mr. Tulkinghorn.

"Oh, dear, yes, sir!  Work of yours."

"Thinking of more important matters, I forget where you said he 
lived?"

"Across the lane, sir.  In fact, he lodges at a--" Mr. Snagsby makes 
another bolt, as if the bit of bread and buffer were insurmountable 
"--at a rag and bottle shop."

"Can you show me the place as I go back?"

"With the greatest pleasure, sir!"

Mr. Snagsby pulls off his sleeves and his grey coat, pulls on his 
black coat, takes his hat from its peg.  "Oh! Here is my little 
woman!" he says aloud.  "My dear, will you be so kind as to tell one 
of the lads to look after the shop while I step across the lane with 
Mr. Tulkinghorn?  Mrs. Snagsby, sir--I shan't be two minutes, my 
love!"

Mrs. Snagsby bends to the lawyer, retires behind the counter, peeps 
at them through the window-blind, goes softly into the back office, 
refers to the entries in the book still lying open.  Is evidently 
curious.

"You will find that the place is rough, sir," says Mr. Snagsby, 
walking deferentially in the road and leaving the narrow pavement to 
the lawyer; "and the party is very rough.  But they're a wild lot in 
general, sir.  The advantage of this particular man is that he never 
wants sleep.  He'll go at it right on end if you want him to, as 
long as ever you like."

It is quite dark now, and the gas-lamps have acquired their full 
effect.  Jostling against clerks going to post the day's letters, 
and against counsel and attorneys going home to dinner, and against 
plaintiffs and defendants and suitors of all sorts, and against the 
general crowd, in whose way the forensic wisdom of ages has 
interposed a million of obstacles to the transaction of the 
commonest business of life; diving through law and equity, and 
through that kindred mystery, the street mud, which is made of 
nobody knows what and collects about us nobody knows whence or how--
we only knowing in general that when there is too much of it we find 
it necessary to shovel it away--the lawyer and the law-stationer 
come to a rag and bottle shop and general emporium of much 
disregarded merchandise, lying and being in the shadow of the wall 
of Lincoln's Inn, and kept, as is announced in paint, to all whom it 
may concern, by one Krook.

"This is where he lives, sir," says the law-stationer.

"This is where he lives, is it?" says the lawyer unconcernedly.  
"Thank you."

"Are you not going in, sir?"

"No, thank you, no; I am going on to the Fields at present.  Good 
evening.  Thank you!"  Mr. Snagsby lifts his hat and returns to his 
little woman and his tea.

But Mr. Tulkinghorn does not go on to the Fields at present.  He 
goes a short way, turns back, comes again to the shop of Mr. Krook, 
and enters it straight.  It is dim enough, with a blot-headed candle 
or so in the windows, and an old man and a cat sitting in the back 
part by a fire.  The old man rises and comes forward, with another 
blot-headed candle in his hand.

"Pray is your lodger within?"

"Male or female, sir?" says Mr. Krook.

"Male.  The person who does copying."

Mr. Krook has eyed his man narrowly.  Knows him by sight.  Has an 
indistinct impression of his aristocratic repute.

"Did you wish to see him, sir?"

"Yes."

"It's what I seldom do myself," says Mr. Krook with a grin.  "Shall 
I call him down?  But it's a weak chance if he'd come, sir!"

"I'll go up to him, then," says Mr. Tulkinghorn.

"Second floor, sir.  Take the candle.  Up there!"  Mr. Krook, with 
his cat beside him, stands at the bottom of the staircase, looking 
after Mr. Tulkinghorn.  "Hi-hi!" he says when Mr. Tulkinghorn has 
nearly disappeared.  The lawyer looks down over the hand-rail.  The 
cat expands her wicked mouth and snarls at him.

"Order, Lady Jane!  Behave yourself to visitors, my lady!  You know 
what they say of my lodger?" whispers Krook, going up a step or two.

"What do they say of him?"

"They say he has sold himself to the enemy, but you and I know 
better--he don't buy.  I'll tell you what, though; my lodger is so 
black-humoured and gloomy that I believe he'd as soon make that 
bargain as any other.  Don't put him out, sir.  That's my advice!"

Mr. Tulkinghorn with a nod goes on his way.  He comes to the dark 
door on the second floor.  He knocks, receives no answer, opens it, 
and accidentally extinguishes his candle in doing so.

The air of the room is almost bad enough to have extinguished it if 
he had not.  It is a small room, nearly black with soot, and grease, 
and dirt.  In the rusty skeleton of a grate, pinched at the middle 
as if poverty had gripped it, a red coke fire burns low.  In the 
corner by the chimney stand a deal table and a broken desk, a 
wilderness marked with a rain of ink.  In another corner a ragged 
old portmanteau on one of the two chairs serves for cabinet or 
wardrobe; no larger one is needed, for it collapses like the cheeks 
of a starved man.  The floor is bare, except that one old mat, 
trodden to shreds of rope-yarn, lies perishing upon the hearth.  No 
curtain veils the darkness of the night, but the discoloured 
shutters are drawn together, and through the two gaunt holes pierced 
in them, famine might be staring in--the banshee of the man upon the 
bed.

For, on a low bed opposite the fire, a confusion of dirty patchwork, 
lean-ribbed ticking, and coarse sacking, the lawyer, hesitating just 
within the doorway, sees a man.  He lies there, dressed in shirt and 
trousers, with bare feet.  He has a yellow look in the spectral 
darkness of a candle that has guttered down until the whole length 
of its wick (still burning) has doubled over and left a tower of 
winding-sheet above it.  His hair is ragged, mingling with his 
whiskers and his beard--the latter, ragged too, and grown, like the 
scum and mist around him, in neglect.  Foul and filthy as the room 
is, foul and filthy as the air is, it is not easy to perceive what 
fumes those are which most oppress the senses in it; but through the 
general sickliness and faintness, and the odour of stale tobacco, 
there comes into the lawyer's mouth the bitter, vapid taste of 
opium.

"Hallo, my friend!" he cries, and strikes his iron candlestick 
against the door.

He thinks he has awakened his friend.  He lies a little turned away, 
but his eyes are surely open.

"Hallo, my friend!" he cries again.  "Hallo!  Hallo!"

As he rattles on the door, the candle which has drooped so long goes 
out and leaves him in the dark, with the gaunt eyes in the shutters 
staring down upon the bed.



CHAPTER XI

Our Dear Brother


A touch on the lawyer's wrinkled hand as he stands in the dark room, 
irresolute, makes him start and say, "What's that?"

"It's me," returns the old man of the house, whose breath is in his 
ear.  "Can't you wake him?"

"No."

"What have you done with your candle?"

"It's gone out.  Here it is."

Krook takes it, goes to the fire, stoops over the red embers, and 
tries to get a light.  The dying ashes have no light to spare, and 
his endeavours are vain.  Muttering, after an ineffectual call to 
his lodger, that he will go downstairs and bring a lighted candle 
from the shop, the old man departs.  Mr. Tulkinghorn, for some new 
reason that he has, does not await his return in the room, but on 
the stairs outside.

The welcome light soon shines upon the wall, as Krook comes slowly 
up with his green-eyed cat following at his heels.  "Does the man 
generally sleep like this?" inquired the lawyer in a low voice.  
"Hi!  I don't know," says Krook, shaking his head and lifting his 
eyebrows.  "I know next to nothing of his habits except that he 
keeps himself very close."

Thus whispering, they both go in together.  As the light goes in, 
the great eyes in the shutters, darkening, seem to close.  Not so 
the eyes upon the bed.

"God save us!" exclaims Mr. Tulkinghorn.  "He is dead!"  Krook drops 
the heavy hand he has taken up so suddenly that the arm swings over 
the bedside.

They look at one another for a moment.

"Send for some doctor!  Call for Miss Flite up the stairs, sir.  
Here's poison by the bed!  Call out for Flite, will you?" says 
Krook, with his lean hands spread out above the body like a 
vampire's wings.

Mr. Tulkinghorn hurries to the landing and calls, "Miss Flite!  
Flite!  Make haste, here, whoever you are!  Flite!"  Krook follows 
him with his eyes, and while he is calling, finds opportunity to 
steal to the old portmanteau and steal back again.

"Run, Flite, run!  The nearest doctor!  Run!"  So Mr. Krook 
addresses a crazy little woman who is his female lodger, who appears 
and vanishes in a breath, who soon returns accompanied by a testy 
medical man brought from his dinner, with a broad, snuffy upper lip 
and a broad Scotch tongue.

"Ey!  Bless the hearts o' ye," says the medical man, looking up at 
them after a moment's examination.  "He's just as dead as Phairy!"

Mr. Tulkinghorn (standing by the old portmanteau) inquires if he has 
been dead any time.

"Any time, sir?" says the medical gentleman.  "It's probable he wull 
have been dead aboot three hours."

"About that time, I should say," observes a dark young man on the 
other side of the bed.

"Air you in the maydickle prayfession yourself, sir?" inquires the 
first.

The dark young man says yes.

"Then I'll just tak' my depairture," replies the other, "for I'm nae 
gude here!"  With which remark he finishes his brief attendance and 
returns to finish his dinner.

The dark young surgeon passes the candle across and across the face 
and carefully examines the law-writer, who has established his 
pretensions to his name by becoming indeed No one.

"I knew this person by sight very well," says he.  "He has purchased 
opium of me for the last year and a half.  Was anybody present 
related to him?" glancing round upon the three bystanders.

"I was his landlord," grimly answers Krook, taking the candle from 
the surgeon's outstretched hand.  "He told me once I was the nearest 
relation he had."

"He has died," says the surgeon, "of an over-dose of opium, there is 
no doubt.  The room is strongly flavoured with it.  There is enough 
here now," taking an old teapot from Mr. Krook, "to kill a dozen 
people."

"Do you think he did it on purpose?" asks Krook.

"Took the over-dose?"

"Yes!"  Krook almost smacks his lips with the unction of a horrible 
interest.

"I can't say.  I should think it unlikely, as he has been in the 
habit of taking so much.  But nobody can tell.  He was very poor, I 
suppose?"

"I suppose he was.  His room--don't look rich," says Krook, who 
might have changed eyes with his cat, as he casts his sharp glance 
around.  "But I have never been in it since he had it, and he was 
too close to name his circumstances to me."

"Did he owe you any rent?"

"Six weeks."

"He will never pay it!" says the young man, resuming his 
examination.  "It is beyond a doubt that he is indeed as dead as 
Pharaoh; and to judge from his appearance and condition, I should 
think it a happy release.  Yet he must have been a good figure when 
a youth, and I dare say, good-looking."  He says this, not 
unfeelingly, while sitting on the bedstead's edge with his face 
towards that other face and his hand upon the region of the heart.  
"I recollect once thinking there was something in his manner, 
uncouth as it was, that denoted a fall in life.  Was that so?" he 
continues, looking round.

Krook replies, "You might as well ask me to describe the ladies 
whose heads of hair I have got in sacks downstairs.  Than that he 
was my lodger for a year and a half and lived--or didn't live--by 
law-writing, I know no more of him."

During this dialogue Mr. Tulkinghorn has stood aloof by the old 
portmanteau, with his hands behind him, equally removed, to all 
appearance, from all three kinds of interest exhibited near the 
bed--from the young surgeon's professional interest in death, 
noticeable as being quite apart from his remarks on the deceased as 
an individual; from the old man's unction; and the little crazy 
woman's awe.  His imperturbable face has been as inexpressive as 
his rusty clothes.  One could not even say he has been thinking all 
this while.  He has shown neither patience nor impatience, nor 
attention nor abstraction.  He has shown nothing but his shell.  As 
easily might the tone of a delicate musical instrument be inferred 
from its case, as the tone of Mr. Tulkinghorn from his case.

He now interposes, addressing the young surgeon in his unmoved, 
professional way.

"I looked in here," he observes, "just before you, with the 
intention of giving this deceased man, whom I never saw alive, some 
employment at his trade of copying.  I had heard of him from my 
stationer--Snagsby of Cook's Court.  Since no one here knows 
anything about him, it might be as well to send for Snagsby.  Ah!" 
to the little crazy woman, who has often seen him in court, and 
whom he has often seen, and who proposes, in frightened dumb-show, 
to go for the law-stationer.  "Suppose you do!"

While she is gone, the surgeon abandons his hopeless investigation 
and covers its subject with the patchwork counterpane.  Mr. Krook 
and he interchange a word or two.  Mr. Tulkinghorn says nothing, 
but stands, ever, near the old portmanteau.

Mr. Snagsby arrives hastily in his grey coat and his black sleeves.  
"Dear me, dear me," he says; "and it has come to this, has it!  
Bless my soul!"

"Can you give the person of the house any information about this 
unfortunate creature, Snagsby?" inquires Mr. Tulkinghorn.  "He was 
in arrears with his rent, it seems.  And he must be buried, you 
know."

"Well, sir," says Mr. Snagsby, coughing his apologetic cough behind 
his hand, "I really don't know what advice I could offer, except 
sending for the beadle."

"I don't speak of advice," returns Mr. Tulkinghorn.  "I could 
advise--"

"No one better, sir, I am sure," says Mr. Snagsby, with his 
deferential cough.

"I speak of affording some clue to his connexions, or to where he 
came from, or to anything concerning him."

"I assure you, sir," says Mr. Snagsby after prefacing his reply 
with his cough of general propitiation, "that I no more know where 
he came from than I know--"

"Where he has gone to, perhaps," suggests the surgeon to help him 
out.

A pause.  Mr. Tulkinghorn looking at the law-stationer.  Mr. Krook, 
with his mouth open, looking for somebody to speak next.

"As to his connexions, sir," says Mr. Snagsby, "if a person was to 
say to me, "Snagsby, here's twenty thousand pound down, ready for 
you in the Bank of England if you'll only name one of 'em,' I 
couldn't do it, sir!  About a year and a half ago--to the best of my 
belief, at the time when he first came to lodge at the present rag 
and bottle shop--"

"That was the time!" says Krook with a nod.

"About a year and a half ago," says Mr. Snagsby, strengthened, "he 
came into our place one morning after breakfast, and finding my 
little woman (which I name Mrs. Snagsby when I use that appellation) 
in our shop, produced a specimen of his handwriting and gave her to 
understand that he was in want of copying work to do and was, not to 
put too fine a point upon it," a favourite apology for plain 
speaking with Mr. Snagsby, which he always offers with a sort of 
argumentative frankness, "hard up!  My little woman is not in 
general partial to strangers, particular--not to put too fine a 
point upon it--when they want anything.  But she was rather took by 
something about this person, whether by his being unshaved, or by 
his hair being in want of attention, or by what other ladies' 
reasons, I leave you to judge; and she accepted of the specimen, and 
likewise of the address.  My little woman hasn't a good ear for 
names," proceeds Mr. Snagsby after consulting his cough of 
consideration behind his hand, "and she considered Nemo equally the 
same as Nimrod.  In consequence of which, she got into a habit of 
saying to me at meals, 'Mr. Snagsby, you haven't found Nimrod any 
work yet!' or 'Mr. Snagsby, why didn't you give that eight and 
thirty Chancery folio in Jarndyce to Nimrod?' or such like.  And 
that is the way he gradually fell into job-work at our place; and 
that is the most I know of him except that he was a quick hand, and 
a hand not sparing of night-work, and that if you gave him out, say, 
five and forty folio on the Wednesday night, you would have it 
brought in on the Thursday morning.  All of which--" Mr. Snagsby 
concludes by politely motioning with his hat towards the bed, as 
much as to add, "I have no doubt my honourable friend would confirm 
if he were in a condition to do it."

"Hadn't you better see," says Mr. Tulkinghorn to Krook, "whether he 
had any papers that may enlighten you?  There will be an inquest, 
and you will be asked the question.  You can read?"

"No, I can't," returns the old man with a sudden grin.

"Snagsby," says Mr. Tulkinghorn, "look over the room for him.  He 
will get into some trouble or difficulty otherwise.  Being here, 
I'll wait if you make haste, and then I can testify on his behalf, 
if it should ever be necessary, that all was fair and right.  If you 
will hold the candle for Mr. Snagsby, my friend, he'll soon see 
whether there is anything to help you."

"In the first place, here's an old portmanteau, sir," says Snagsby.

Ah, to be sure, so there is!  Mr. Tulkinghorn does not appear to 
have seen it before, though he is standing so close to it, and 
though there is very little else, heaven knows.

The marine-store merchant holds the light, and the law-stationer 
conducts the search.  The surgeon leans against the corner of the 
chimney-piece; Miss Flite peeps and trembles just within the door.  
The apt old scholar of the old school, with his dull black breeches 
tied with ribbons at the knees, his large black waistcoat, his long-
sleeved black coat, and his wisp of limp white neckerchief tied in 
the bow the peerage knows so well, stands in exactly the same place 
and attitude.

There are some worthless articles of clothing in the old 
portmanteau; there is a bundle of pawnbrokers' duplicates, those 
turnpike tickets on the road of poverty; there is a crumpled paper, 
smelling of opium, on which are scrawled rough memoranda--as, took, 
such a day, so many grains; took, such another day, so many more--
begun some time ago, as if with the intention of being regularly 
continued, but soon left off.  There are a few dirty scraps of 
newspapers, all referring to coroners' inquests; there is nothing 
else.  They search the cupboard and the drawer of the ink-splashed 
table.  There is not a morsel of an old letter or of any other 
writing in either.  The young surgeon examines the dress on the law-
writer.  A knife and some odd halfpence are all he finds.  Mr. 
Snagsby's suggestion is the practical suggestion after all, and the 
beadle must be called in.

So the little crazy lodger goes for the beadle, and the rest come 
out of the room.  "Don't leave the cat there!" says the surgeon; 
"that won't do!"  Mr. Krook therefore drives her out before him, and 
she goes furtively downstairs, winding her lithe tail and licking 
her lips.

"Good night!" says Mr. Tulkinghorn, and goes home to Allegory and 
meditation.

By this time the news has got into the court.  Groups of its 
inhabitants assemble to discuss the thing, and the outposts of the 
army of observation (principally boys) are pushed forward to Mr. 
Krook's window, which they closely invest.  A policeman has already 
walked up to the room, and walked down again to the door, where he 
stands like a tower, only condescending to see the boys at his base 
occasionally; but whenever he does see them, they quail and fall 
back.  Mrs. Perkins, who has not been for some weeks on speaking 
terms with Mrs. Piper in consequence for an unpleasantness 
originating in young Perkins' having "fetched" young Piper "a 
crack," renews her friendly intercourse on this auspicious occasion.  
The potboy at the corner, who is a privileged amateur, as possessing 
official knowledge of life and having to deal with drunken men 
occasionally, exchanges confidential communications with the 
policeman and has the appearance of an impregnable youth, 
unassailable by truncheons and unconfinable in station-houses.  
People talk across the court out of window, and bare-headed scouts 
come hurrying in from Chancery Lane to know what's the matter.  The 
general feeling seems to be that it's a blessing Mr. Krook warn't 
made away with first, mingled with a little natural disappointment 
that he was not.  In the midst of this sensation, the beadle 
arrives.

The beadle, though generally understood in the neighbourhood to be a 
ridiculous institution, is not without a certain popularity for the 
moment, if it were only as a man who is going to see the body.  The 
policeman considers him an imbecile civilian, a remnant of the 
barbarous watchmen times, but gives him admission as something that 
must be borne with until government shall abolish him.  The 
sensation is heightened as the tidings spread from mouth to mouth 
that the beadle is on the ground and has gone in.

By and by the beadle comes out, once more intensifying the 
sensation, which has rather languished in the interval.  He is 
understood to be in want of witnesses for the inquest to-morrow who 
can tell the coroner and jury anything whatever respecting the 
deceased.  Is immediately referred to innumerable people who can 
tell nothing whatever.  Is made more imbecile by being constantly 
informed that Mrs. Green's son "was a law-writer his-self and knowed 
him better than anybody," which son of Mrs. Green's appears, on 
inquiry, to be at the present time aboard a vessel bound for China, 
three months out, but considered accessible by telegraph on 
application to the Lords of the Admiralty.  Beadle goes into various 
shops and parlours, examining the inhabitants, always shutting the 
door first, and by exclusion, delay, and general idiotcy 
exasperating the public.  Policeman seen to smile to potboy.  Public 
loses interest and undergoes reaction.  Taunts the beadle in shrill 
youthful voices with having boiled a boy, choruses fragments of a 
popular song to that effect and importing that the boy was made into 
soup for the workhouse.  Policeman at last finds it necessary to 
support the law and seize a vocalist, who is released upon the 
flight of the rest on condition of his getting out of this then, 
come, and cutting it--a condition he immediately observes.  So the 
sensation dies off for the time; and the unmoved policeman (to whom 
a little opium, more or less, is nothing), with his shining hat, 
stiff stock, inflexible great-coat, stout belt and bracelet, and all 
things fitting, pursues his lounging way with a heavy tread, beating 
the palms of his white gloves one against the other and stopping now 
and then at a street-corner to look casually about for anything 
between a lost child and a murder.

Under cover of the night, the feeble-minded beadle comes flitting 
about Chancery Lane with his summonses, in which every juror's name 
is wrongly spelt, and nothing rightly spelt but the beadle's own 
name, which nobody can read or wants to know.  The summonses served 
and his witnesses forewarned, the beadle goes to Mr. Krook's to keep 
a small appointment he has made with certain paupers, who, presently 
arriving, are conducted upstairs, where they leave the great eyes in 
the shutter something new to stare at, in that last shape which 
earthly lodgings take for No one--and for Every one.

And all that night the coffin stands ready by the old portmanteau; 
and the lonely figure on the bed, whose path in life has lain 
through five and forty years, lies there with no more track behind 
him that any one can trace than a deserted infant.

Next day the court is all alive--is like a fair, as Mrs. Perkins, 
more than reconciled to Mrs. Piper, says in amicable conversation 
with that excellent woman.  The coroner is to sit in the first-floor 
room at the Sol's Arms, where the Harmonic Meetings take place twice 
a week and where the chair is filled by a gentleman of professional 
celebrity, faced by Little Swills, the comic vocalist, who hopes 
(according to the bill in the window) that his friends will rally 
round him and support first-rate talent.  The Sol's Arms does a 
brisk stroke of business all the morning.  Even children so require 
sustaining under the general excitement that a pieman who has 
established himself for the occasion at the corner of the court says 
his brandy-balls go off like smoke.  What time the beadle, hovering 
between the door of Mr. Krook's establishment and the door of the 
Sol's Arms, shows the curiosity in his keeping to a few discreet 
spirits and accepts the compliment of a glass of ale or so in 
return.

At the appointed hour arrives the coroner, for whom the jurymen are 
waiting and who is received with a salute of skittles from the good 
dry skittle-ground attached to the Sol's Arms.  The coroner 
frequents more public-houses than any man alive.  The smell of 
sawdust, beer, tobacco-smoke, and spirits is inseparable in his 
vocation from death in its most awful shapes.  He is conducted by 
the beadle and the landlord to the Harmonic Meeting Room, where he 
puts his hat on the piano and takes a Windsor-chair at the head of a 
long table formed of several short tables put together and 
ornamented with glutinous rings in endless involutions, made by pots 
and glasses.  As many of the jury as can crowd together at the table 
sit there.  The rest get among the spittoons and pipes or lean 
against the piano.  Over the coroner's head is a small iron garland, 
the pendant handle of a bell, which rather gives the majesty of the 
court the appearance of going to be hanged presently.

Call over and swear the jury!  While the ceremony is in progress, 
sensation is created by the entrance of a chubby little man in a 
large shirt-collar, with a moist eye and an inflamed nose, who 
modestly takes a position near the door as one of the general 
public, but seems familiar with the room too.  A whisper circulates 
that this is Little Swills.  It is considered not unlikely that he 
will get up an imitation of the coroner and make it the principal 
feature of the Harmonic Meeting in the evenlng.

"Well, gentlemen--" the coroner begins.

"Silence there, will you!" says the beadle.  Not to the coroner, 
though it might appear so.

"Well, gentlemen," resumes the coroner.  "You are impanelled here to 
inquire into the death of a certain man.  Evidence will be given 
before you as to the circumstances attending that death, and you 
will give your verdict according to the--skittles; they must be 
stopped, you know, beadle!--evidence, and not according to anything 
else.  The first thing to be done is to view the body."

"Make way there!" cries the beadle.

So they go out in a loose procession, something after the manner of 
a straggling funeral, and make their inspection in Mr. Krook's back 
second floor, from which a few of the jurymen retire pale and 
precipitately.  The beadle is very careful that two gentlemen not 
very neat about the cuffs and buttons (for whose accommodation he 
has provided a special little table near the coroner in the Harmonic 
Meeting Room) should see all that is to be seen.  For they are the 
public chroniclers of such inquiries by the line; and he is not 
superior to the universal human infirmity, but hopes to read in 
print what "Mooney, the active and intelligent beadle of the 
district," said and did and even aspires to see the name of Mooney 
as familiarly and patronizingly mentioned as the name of the hangman 
is, according to the latest examples.

Little Swills is waiting for the coroner and jury on their return.  
Mr. Tulkinghorn, also.  Mr. Tulkinghorn is received with distinction 
and seated near the coroner between that high judicial officer, a 
bagatelle-board, and the coal-box.  The inquiry proceeds.  The jury 
learn how the subject of their inquiry died, and learn no more about 
him.  "A very eminent solicitor is in attendance, gentlemen," says 
the coroner, "who, I am informed, was accidentally present when 
discovery of the death was made, but he could only repeat the 
evidence you have already heard from the surgeon, the landlord, the 
lodger, and the law-stationer, and it is not necessary to trouble 
him.  Is anybody in attendance who knows anything more?"

Mrs. Piper pushed forward by Mrs. Perkins.  Mrs. Piper sworn.

Anastasia Piper, gentlemen.  Married woman.  Now, Mrs. Piper, what 
have you got to say about this?

Why, Mrs. Piper has a good deal to say, chiefly in parentheses and 
without punctuation, but not much to tell.  Mrs. Piper lives in the 
court (which her husband is a cabinet-maker), and it has long been 
well beknown among the neighbours (counting from the day next but 
one before the half-baptizing of Alexander James Piper aged eighteen 
months and four days old on accounts of not being expected to live 
such was the sufferings gentlemen of that child in his gums) as the 
plaintive--so Mrs. Piper insists on calling the deceased--was 
reported to have sold himself.  Thinks it was the plaintive's air in 
which that report originatinin.  See the plaintive often and 
considered as his air was feariocious and not to be allowed to go 
about some children being timid (and if doubted hoping Mrs. Perkins 
may be brought forard for she is here and will do credit to her 
husband and herself and family).  Has seen the plaintive wexed and 
worrited by the children (for children they will ever be and you 
cannot expect them specially if of playful dispositions to be 
Methoozellers which you was not yourself).  On accounts of this and 
his dark looks has often dreamed as she see him take a pick-axe from 
his pocket and split Johnny's head (which the child knows not fear 
and has repeatually called after him close at his eels).  Never 
however see the plaintive take a pick-axe or any other wepping far 
from it.  Has seen him hurry away when run and called after as if 
not partial to children and never see him speak to neither child nor 
grown person at any time (excepting the boy that sweeps the crossing 
down the lane over the way round the corner which if he was here 
would tell you that he has been seen a-speaking to him frequent).

Says the coroner, is that boy here?  Says the beadle, no, sir, he is 
not here.  Says the coroner, go and fetch him then.  In the absence 
of the active and intelligent, the coroner converses with Mr. 
Tulkinghorn.

Oh! Here's the boy, gentlemen!

Here he is, very muddy, very hoarse, very ragged.  Now, boy!  But 
stop a minute.  Caution.  This boy must be put through a few 
preliminary paces.

Name, Jo.  Nothing else that he knows on.  Don't know that everybody 
has two names.  Never heerd of sich a think.  Don't know that Jo is 
short for a longer name.  Thinks it long enough for HIM.  HE don't 
find no fault with it.  Spell it?  No.  HE can't spell it.  No 
father, no mother, no friends.  Never been to school.  What's home?  
Knows a broom's a broom, and knows it's wicked to tell a lie.  Don't 
recollect who told him about the broom or about the lie, but knows 
both.  Can't exactly say what'll be done to him arter he's dead if 
he tells a lie to the gentlemen here, but believes it'll be 
something wery bad to punish him, and serve him right--and so he'll 
tell the truth.

"This won't do, gentlemen!" says the coroner with a melancholy shake 
of the head.

"Don't you think you can receive his evidence, sir?" asks an 
attentive juryman.

"Out of the question," says the coroner.  "You have heard the boy.  
'Can't exactly say' won't do, you know.  We can't take THAT in a 
court of justice, gentlemen.  It's terrible depravity.  Put the boy 
aside."

Boy put aside, to the great edification of the audience, especially 
of Little Swills, the comic vocalist.

Now.  Is there any other witness?  No other witness.

Very well, gentlemen!  Here's a man unknown, proved to have been in 
the habit of taking opium in large quantities for a year and a half, 
found dead of too much opium.  If you think you have any evidence to 
lead you to the conclusion that he committed suicide, you will come 
to that conclusion.  If you think it is a case of accidental death, 
you will find a verdict accordingly.

Verdict accordingly.  Accidental death.  No doubt.  Gentlemen, you 
are discharged.  Good afternoon.

While the coroner buttons his great-coat, Mr. Tulkinghorn and he 
give private audience to the rejected witness in a corner.

That graceless creature only knows that the dead man (whom he 
recognized just now by his yellow face and black hair) was sometimes 
hooted and pursued about the streets.  That one cold winter night 
when he, the boy, was shivering in a doorway near his crossing, the 
man turned to look at him, and came back, and having questioned him 
and found that he had not a friend in the world, said, "Neither have 
I.  Not one!" and gave him the price of a supper and a night's 
lodging.  That the man had often spoken to him since and asked him 
whether he slept sound at night, and how he bore cold and hunger, 
and whether he ever wished to die, and similar strange questions.  
That when the man had no money, he would say in passing, "I am as 
poor as you to-day, Jo," but that when he had any, he had always (as 
the boy most heartily believes) been glad to give him some.

"He was wery good to me," says the boy, wiping his eyes with his 
wretched sleeve.  "Wen I see him a-layin' so stritched out just now, 
I wished he could have heerd me tell him so.  He wos wery good to 
me, he wos!"

As he shuffles downstairs, Mr. Snagsby, lying in wait for him, puts 
a half-crown in his hand.  "If you ever see me coming past your 
crossing with my little woman--I mean a lady--" says Mr. Snagsby 
with his finger on his nose, "don't allude to it!"

For some little time the jurymen hang about the Sol's Arms 
colloquially.  In the sequel, half-a-dozen are caught up in a cloud 
of pipe-smoke that pervades the parlour of the Sol's Arms; two 
stroll to Hampstead; and four engage to go half-price to the play at 
night, and top up with oysters.  Little Swills is treated on several 
hands.  Being asked what he thinks of the proceedings, characterizes 
them (his strength lying in a slangular direction) as "a rummy 
start."  The landlord of the Sol's Arms, finding Little Swills so 
popular, commends him highly to the jurymen and public, observing 
that for a song in character he don't know his equal and that that 
man's character-wardrobe would fill a cart.

Thus, gradually the Sol's Arms melts into the shadowy night and then 
flares out of it strong in gas.  The Harmonic Meeting hour arriving, 
the gentleman of professional celebrity takes the chair, is faced 
(red-faced) by Little Swills; their friends rally round them and 
support first-rate talent.  In the zenith of the evening, Little 
Swills says, "Gentlemen, if you'll permit me, I'll attempt a short 
description of a scene of real life that came off here to-day."  Is 
much applauded and encouraged; goes out of the room as Swills; comes 
in as the coroner (not the least in the world like him); describes 
the inquest, with recreative intervals of piano-forte accompaniment, 
to the refrain: With his (the coroner's) tippy tol li doll, tippy 
tol lo doll, tippy tol li doll, Dee!

The jingling piano at last is silent, and the Harmonic friends rally 
round their pillows.  Then there is rest around the lonely figure, 
now laid in its last earthly habitation; and it is watched by the 
gaunt eyes in the shutters through some quiet hours of night.  If 
this forlorn man could have been prophetically seen lying here by 
the mother at whose breast he nestled, a little child, with eyes 
upraised to her loving face, and soft hand scarcely knowing how to 
close upon the neck to which it crept, what an impossibility the 
vision would have seemed!  Oh, if in brighter days the now-
extinguished fire within him ever burned for one woman who held him 
in her heart, where is she, while these ashes are above the ground!

It is anything but a night of rest at Mr. Snagsby's, in Cook's 
Court, where Guster murders sleep by going, as Mr. Snagsby himself 
allows--not to put too fine a point upon it--out of one fit into 
twenty.  The occasion of this seizure is that Guster has a tender 
heart and a susceptible something that possibly might have been 
imagination, but for Tooting and her patron saint.  Be it what it 
may, now, it was so direfully impressed at tea-time by Mr. Snagsby's 
account of the inquiry at which he had assisted that at supper-time 
she projected herself into the kitchen, preceded by a flying Dutch 
cheese, and fell into a fit of unusual duration, which she only came 
out of to go into another, and another, and so on through a chain of 
fits, with short intervals between, of which she has pathetically 
availed herself by consuming them in entreaties to Mrs. Snagsby not 
to give her warning "when she quite comes to," and also in appeals 
to the whole establishment to lay her down on the stones and go to 
bed.  Hence, Mr. Snagsby, at last hearing the cock at the little 
dairy in Cursitor Street go into that disinterested ecstasy of his 
on the subject of daylight, says, drawing a long breath, though the 
most patient of men, "I thought you was dead, I am sure!"

What question this enthusiastic fowl supposes he settles when he 
strains himself to such an extent, or why he should thus crow (so 
men crow on various triumphant public occasions, however) about what 
cannot be of any moment to him, is his affair.  It is enough that 
daylight comes, morning comes, noon comes.

Then the active and intelligent, who has got into the morning papers 
as such, comes with his pauper company to Mr. Krook's and bears off 
the body of our dear brother here departed to a hemmed-in 
churchyard, pestiferous and obscene, whence malignant diseases are 
communicated to the bodies of our dear brothers and sisters who have 
not departed, while our dear brothers and sisters who hang about 
official back-stairs--would to heaven they HAD departed!--are very 
complacent and agreeable.  Into a beastly scrap of ground which a 
Turk would reject as a savage abomination and a Caffre would shudder 
at, they bring our dear brother here departed to receive Christian 
burial.

With houses looking on, on every side, save where a reeking little 
tunnel of a court gives access to the iron gate--with every villainy 
of life in action close on death, and every poisonous element of 
death in action close on life--here they lower our dear brother down 
a foot or two, here sow him in corruption, to be raised in 
corruption: an avenging ghost at many a sick-bedside, a shameful 
testimony to future ages how civilization and barbarism walked this 
boastful island together.

Come night, come darkness, for you cannot come too soon or stay too 
long by such a place as this!  Come, straggling lights into the 
windows of the ugly houses; and you who do iniquity therein, do it 
at least with this dread scene shut out!  Come, flame of gas, 
burning so sullenly above the iron gate, on which the poisoned air 
deposits its witch-ointment slimy to the touch!  It is well that you 
should call to every passerby, "Look here!"

With the night comes a slouching figure through the tunnel-court to 
the outside of the iron gate.  It holds the gate with its hands and 
looks in between the bars, stands looking in for a little while.

It then, with an old broom it carries, softly sweeps the step and 
makes the archway clean.  It does so very busily and trimly, looks 
in again a little while, and so departs.

Jo, is it thou?  Well, well!  Though a rejected witness, who "can't 
exactly say" what will be done to him in greater hands than men's, 
thou art not quite in outer darkness.  There is something like a 
distant ray of light in thy muttered reason for this: "He wos wery 
good to me, he wos!"



CHAPTER XII

On the Watch


It has left off raining down in Lincolnshire at last, and Chesney 
Wold has taken heart.  Mrs. Rouncewell is full of hospitable cares, 
for Sir Leicester and my Lady are coming home from Paris.  The 
fashionable intelligence has found it out and communicates the glad 
tidings to benighted England.  It has also found out that they will 
entertain a brilliant and distinguished circle of the ELITE of the 
BEAU MONDE (the fashionable intelligence is weak in English, but a 
giant refreshed in French) at the ancient and hospitable family seat 
in Lincolnshire.

For the greater honour of the brilliant and distinguished circle, 
and of Chesney Wold into the bargain, the broken arch of the bridge 
in the park is mended; and the water, now retired within its proper 
limits and again spanned gracefully, makes a figure in the prospect 
from the house.  The clear, cold sunshine glances into the brittle 
woods and approvingly beholds the sharp wind scattering the leaves 
and drying the moss.  It glides over the park after the moving 
shadows of the clouds, and chases them, and never catches them, all 
day.  It looks in at the windows and touches the ancestral portraits 
with bars and patches of brightness never contemplated by the 
painters.  Athwart the picture of my Lady, over the great chimney-
piece, it throws a broad bend-sinister of light that strikes down 
crookedly into the hearth and seems to rend it.

Through the same cold sunshine and the same sharp wind, my Lady and 
Sir Leicester, in their travelling chariot (my Lady's woman and Sir 
Leicester's man affectionate in the rumble), start for home.  With a 
considerable amount of jingling and whip-cracking, and many plunging 
demonstrations on the part of two bare-backed horses and two 
centaurs with glazed hats, jack-boots, and flowing manes and tails, 
they rattle out of the yard of the Hotel Bristol in the Place 
Vendome and canter between the sun-and-shadow-chequered colonnade of 
the Rue de Rivoli and the garden of the ill-fated palace of a 
headless king and queen, off by the Place of Concord, and the 
Elysian Fields, and the Gate of the Star, out of Paris.

Sooth to say, they cannot go away too fast, for even here my Lady 
Dedlock has been bored to death.  Concert, assembly, opera, theatre, 
drive, nothing is new to my Lady under the worn-out heavens.  Only 
last Sunday, when poor wretches were gay--within the walls playing 
with children among the clipped trees and the statues in the Palace 
Garden; walking, a score abreast, in the Elysian Fields, made more 
Elysian by performing dogs and wooden horses; between whiles 
filtering (a few) through the gloomy Cathedral of Our Lady to say a 
word or two at the base of a pillar within flare of a rusty little 
gridiron-full of gusty little tapers; without the walls encompassing 
Paris with dancing, love-making, wine-drinking, tobacco-smoking, 
tomb-visiting, billiard card and domino playing, quack-doctoring, 
and much murderous refuse, animate and inanimate--only last Sunday, 
my Lady, in the desolation of Boredom and the clutch of Giant 
Despair, almost hated her own maid for being in spirits.

She cannot, therefore, go too fast from Paris.  Weariness of soul 
lies before her, as it lies behind--her Ariel has put a girdle of it 
round the whole earth, and it cannot be unclasped--but the imperfect 
remedy is always to fly from the last place where it has been 
experienced.  Fling Paris back into the distance, then, exchanging 
it for endless avenues and cross-avenues of wintry trees!  And, when 
next beheld, let it be some leagues away, with the Gate of the Star 
a white speck glittering in the sun, and the city a mere mound in a 
plain--two dark square towers rising out of it, and light and shadow 
descending on it aslant, like the angels in Jacob's dream!

Sir Leicester is generally in a complacent state, and rarely bored.  
When he has nothing else to do, he can always contemplate his own 
greatness.  It is a considerable advantage to a man to have so 
inexhaustible a subject.  After reading his letters, he leans back 
in his corner of the carriage and generally reviews his importance 
to society.

"You have an unusual amount of correspondence this morning?" says my 
Lady after a long time.  She is fatigued with reading.  Has almost 
read a page in twenty miles.

"Nothing in it, though.  Nothing whatever."

"I saw one of Mr. Tulkinghorn's long effusions, I think?"

"You see everything," says Sir Leicester with admiration.

"Ha!" sighs my Lady.  "He is the most tiresome of men!"

"He sends--I really beg your pardon--he sends," says Sir Leicester, 
selecting the letter and unfolding it, "a message to you.  Our 
stopping to change horses as I came to his postscript drove it out 
of my memory.  I beg you'll excuse me.  He says--"  Sir Leicester is 
so long in taking out his eye-glass and adjusting it that my Lady 
looks a little irritated.  "He says 'In the matter of the right of 
way--'  I beg your pardon, that's not the place.  He says--yes!  
Here I have it!  He says, 'I beg my respectful compliments to my 
Lady, who, I hope, has benefited by the change.  Will you do me the 
favour to mention (as it may interest her) that I have something to 
tell her on her return in reference to the person who copied the 
affidavit in the Chancery suit, which so powerfully stimulated her 
curiosity.  I have seen him.'"

My Lady, leaning forward, looks out of her window.

"That's the message," observes Sir Leicester.

"I should like to walk a little," says my Lady, still looking out of 
her window.

"Walk?" repeats Sir Leicester in a tone of surprise.

"I should like to walk a little," says my Lady with unmistakable 
distinctness.  "Please to stop the carriage."

The carriage is stopped, the affectionate man alights from the 
rumble, opens the door, and lets down the steps, obedient to an 
impatient motion of my Lady's hand.  My Lady alights so quickly and 
walks away so quickly that Sir Leicester, for all his scrupulous 
politeness, is unable to assist her, and is left behind.  A space of 
a minute or two has elapsed before he comes up with her.  She 
smiles, looks very handsome, takes his arm, lounges with him for a 
quarter of a mile, is very much bored, and resumes her seat in the 
carriage.

The rattle and clatter continue through the greater part of three 
days, with more or less of bell-jingling and whip-cracking, and more 
or less plunging of centaurs and bare-backed horses.  Their courtly 
politeness to each other at the hotels where they tarry is the theme 
of general admiration.  Though my Lord IS a little aged for my Lady, 
says Madame, the hostess of the Golden Ape, and though he might be 
her amiable father, one can see at a glance that they love each 
other.  One observes my Lord with his white hair, standing, hat in 
hand, to help my Lady to and from the carriage.  One observes my 
Lady, how recognisant of my Lord's politeness, with an inclination 
of her gracious head and the concession of her so-genteel fingers!  
It is ravishing!

The sea has no appreciation of great men, but knocks them about like 
the small fry.  It is habitually hard upon Sir Leicester, whose 
countenance it greenly mottles in the manner of sage-cheese and in 
whose aristocratic system it effects a dismal revolution.  It is the 
Radical of Nature to him.  Nevertheless, his dignity gets over it 
after stopping to refit, and he goes on with my Lady for Chesney 
Wold, lying only one night in London on the way to Lincolnshire.

Through the same cold sunlight, colder as the day declines, and 
through the same sharp wind, sharper as the separate shadows of bare 
trees gloom together in the woods, and as the Ghost's Walk, touched 
at the western corner by a pile of fire in the sky, resigns itself 
to coming night, they drive into the park.  The rooks, swinging in 
their lofty houses in the elm-tree avenue, seem to discuss the 
question of the occupancy of the carriage as it passes underneath, 
some agreeing that Sir Leicester and my Lady are come down, some 
arguing with malcontents who won't admit it, now all consenting to 
consider the question disposed of, now all breaking out again in 
violent debate, incited by one obstinate and drowsy bird who will 
persist in putting in a last contradictory croak.  Leaving them to 
swing and caw, the travelling chariot rolls on to the house, where 
fires gleam warmly through some of the windows, though not through 
so many as to give an inhabited expression to the darkening mass of 
front.  But the brilliant and distinguished circle will soon do 
that.

Mrs. Rouncewell is in attendance and receives Sir Leicester's 
customary shake of the hand with a profound curtsy.

"How do you do, Mrs. Rouncewell?  I am glad to see you."

"I hope I have the honour of welcoming you in good health, Sir 
Leicester?"

"In excellent health, Mrs. Rouncewell."

"My Lady is looking charmingly well," says Mrs. Rouncewell with 
another curtsy.

My Lady signifies, without profuse expenditure of words, that she is 
as wearily well as she can hope to be.

But Rosa is in the distance, behind the housekeeper; and my Lady, 
who has not subdued the quickness of her observation, whatever else 
she may have conquered, asks, "Who is that girl?"

"A young scholar of mine, my Lady.  Rosa."

"Come here, Rosa!"  Lady Dedlock beckons her, with even an 
appearance of interest.  "Why, do you know how pretty you are, 
child?" she says, touching her shoulder with her two forefingers.

Rosa, very much abashed, says, "No, if you please, my Lady!" and 
glances up, and glances down, and don't know where to look, but 
looks all the prettier.

"How old are you?"

"Nineteen, my Lady."

"Nineteen," repeats my Lady thoughtfully.  "Take care they don't 
spoil you by flattery."

"Yes, my Lady."

My Lady taps her dimpled cheek with the same delicate gloved fingers 
and goes on to the foot of the oak staircase, where Sir Leicester 
pauses for her as her knightly escort.  A staring old Dedlock in a 
panel, as large as life and as dull, looks as if he didn't know what 
to make of it, which was probably his general state of mind in the 
days of Queen Elizabeth.

That evening, in the housekeeper's room, Rosa can do nothing but 
murmur Lady Dedlock's praises.  She is so affable, so graceful, so 
beautiful, so elegant; has such a sweet voice and such a thrilling 
touch that Rosa can feel it yet!  Mrs. Rouncewell confirms all this, 
not without personal pride, reserving only the one point of 
affability.  Mrs. Rouncewell is not quite sure as to that.  Heaven 
forbid that she should say a syllable in dispraise of any member of 
that excellent family, above all, of my Lady, whom the whole world 
admires; but if my Lady would only be "a little more free," not 
quite so cold and distant, Mrs. Rounceweil thinks she would be more 
affable.

"'Tis almost a pity," Mrs. Rouncewell adds--only "almost" because it 
borders on impiety to suppose that anything could be better than it 
is, in such an express dispensation as the Dedlock affairs--"that my 
Lady has no family.  If she had had a daughter now, a grown young 
lady, to interest her, I think she would have had the only kind of 
excellence she wants."

"Might not that have made her still more proud, grandmother?" says 
Watt, who has been home and come back again, he is such a good 
grandson.

"More and most, my dear," returns the housekeeper with dignity, "are 
words it's not my place to use--nor so much as to hear--applied to 
any drawback on my Lady."

"I beg your pardon, grandmother.  But she is proud, is she not?"

"If she is, she has reason to be.  The Dedlock family have always 
reason to be."

"Well," says Watt, "it's to be hoped they line out of their prayer-
books a certain passage for the common people about pride and 
vainglory.  Forgive me, grandmother!  Only a joke!"

"Sir Leicester and Lady Dedlock, my dear, are not fit subjects for 
joking."

"Sir Leicester is no joke by any means," says Watt, "and I humbly 
ask his pardon.  I suppose, grandmother, that even with the family 
and their guests down here, there is no ojection to my prolonging my 
stay at the Dedlock Arms for a day or two, as any other traveller 
might?"

"Surely, none in the world, child."

"I am glad of that," says Watt, "because I have an inexpressible 
desire to extend my knowledge of this beautiful neighbourhood."

He happens to glance at Rosa, who looks down and is very shy indeed.  
But according to the old superstition, it should be Rosa's ears that 
burn, and not her fresh bright cheeks, for my Lady's maid is holding 
forth about her at this moment with surpassing energy.

My Lady's maid is a Frenchwoman of two and thirty, from somewhere in 
the southern country about Avignon and Marseilles, a large-eyed 
brown woman with black hair who would be handsome but for a certain 
feline mouth and general uncomfortable tightness of face, rendering 
the jaws too eager and the skull too prominent.  There is something 
indefinably keen and wan about her anatomy, and she has a watchful 
way of looking out of the corners of her eyes without turning her 
head which could be pleasantly dispensed with, especially when she 
is in an ill humour and near knives.  Through all the good taste of 
her dress and little adornments, these objections so express 
themselves that she seems to go about like a very neat she-wolf 
imperfectly tamed.  Besides being accomplished in all the knowledge 
appertaining to her post, she is almost an Englishwoman in her 
acquaintance with the language; consequently, she is in no want of 
words to shower upon Rosa for having attracted my Lady's attention, 
and she pours them out with such grim ridicule as she sits at dinner 
that her companion, the affectionate man, is rather relieved when 
she arrives at the spoon stage of that performance.

Ha, ha, ha!  She, Hortense, been in my Lady's service since five 
years and always kept at the distance, and this doll, this puppet, 
caressed--absolutely caressed--by my Lady on the moment of her 
arriving at the house!  Ha, ha, ha!  "And do you know how pretty you 
are, child?"  "No, my Lady."  You are right there!  "And how old are 
you, child!  And take care they do not spoil you by flattery, 
child!"  Oh, how droll!  It is the BEST thing altogether.

In short, it is such an admirable thing that Mademoiselle Hortense 
can't forget it; but at meals for days afterwards, even among her 
countrywomen and others attached in like capacity to the troop of 
visitors, relapses into silent enjoyment of the joke--an enjoyment 
expressed, in her own convivial manner, by an additional tightness 
of face, thin elongation of compressed lips, and sidewise look, 
which intense appreciation of humour is frequently reflected in my 
Lady's mirrors when my Lady is not among them.

All the mirrors in the house are brought into action now, many of 
them after a long blank.  They reflect handsome faces, simpering 
faces, youthful faces, faces of threescore and ten that will not 
submit to be old; the entire collection of faces that have come to 
pass a January week or two at Chesney Wold, and which the 
fashionable intelligence, a mighty hunter before the Lord, hunts 
with a keen scent, from their breaking cover at the Court of St. 
James's to their being run down to death.  The place in Lincolnshire 
is all alive.  By day guns and voices are heard ringing in the 
woods, horsemen and carriages enliven the park roads, servants and 
hangers-on pervade the village and the Dedlock Arms.  Seen by night 
from distant openings in the trees, the row of windows in the long 
drawing-room, where my Lady's picture hangs over the great chimney-
piece, is like a row of jewels set in a black frame.  On Sunday the 
chill little church is almost warmed by so much gallant company, and 
the general flavour of the Dedlock dust is quenched in delicate 
perfumes.

The brilliant and distinguished circle comprehends within it no 
contracted amount of education, sense, courage, honour, beauty, and 
virtue.  Yet there is something a little wrong about it in despite 
of its immense advantages.  What can it be?

Dandyism?  There is no King George the Fourth now (more the pity) to 
set the dandy fashion; there are no clear-starched jack-towel 
neckcloths, no short-waisted coats, no false calves, no stays.  
There are no caricatures, now, of effeminate exquisites so arrayed, 
swooning in opera boxes with excess of delight and being revived by 
other dainty creatures poking long-necked scent-bottles at their 
noses.  There is no beau whom it takes four men at once to shake 
into his buckskins, or who goes to see all the executions, or who is 
troubled with the self-reproach of having once consumed a pea.  But 
is there dandyism in the brilliant and distinguished circle 
notwithstanding, dandyism of a more mischievous sort, that has got 
below the surface and is doing less harmless things than jack-
towelling itself and stopping its own digestion, to which no 
rational person need particularly object?

Why, yes.  It cannot be disguised.  There ARE at Chesney Wold this 
January week some ladies and gentlemen of the newest fashion, who 
have set up a dandyism--in religion, for instance.  Who in mere 
lackadaisical want of an emotion have agreed upon a little dandy 
talk about the vulgar wanting faith in things in general, meaning in 
the things that have been tried and found wanting, as though a low 
fellow should unaccountably lose faith in a bad shilling after 
finding it out!  Who would make the vulgar very picturesque and 
faithful by putting back the hands upon the clock of time and 
cancelling a few hundred years of history.

There are also ladies and gentlemen of another fashion, not so new, 
but very elegant, who have agreed to put a smooth glaze on the world 
and to keep down all its realities.  For whom everything must be 
languid and pretty.  Who have found out the perpetual stoppage.  Who 
are to rejoice at nothing and be sorry for nothing.  Who are not to 
be disturbed by ideas.  On whom even the fine arts, attending in 
powder and walking backward like the Lord Chamberlain, must array 
themselves in the milliners' and tailors' patterns of past 
generations and be particularly careful not to be in earnest or to 
receive any impress from the moving age.

Then there is my Lord Boodle, of considerable reputation with his 
party, who has known what office is and who tells Sir Leicester 
Dedlock with much gravity, after dinner, that he really does not see 
to what the present age is tending.  A debate is not what a debate 
used to be; the House is not what the House used to be; even a 
Cabinet is not what it formerly was.  He perceives with astonishment 
that supposing the present government to be overthrown, the limited 
choice of the Crown, in the formation of a new ministry, would lie 
between Lord Coodle and Sir Thomas Doodle--supposing it to be 
impossible for the Duke of Foodle to act with Goodle, which may be 
assumed to be the case in consequence of the breach arising out of 
that affair with Hoodle.  Then, giving the Home Department and the 
leadership of the House of Commons to Joodle, the Exchequer to 
Koodle, the Colonies to Loodle, and the Foreign Office to Moodle, 
what are you to do with Noodle?  You can't offer him the Presidency 
of the Council; that is reserved for Poodle.  You can't put him in 
the Woods and Forests; that is hardly good enough for Quoodle.  What 
follows?  That the country is shipwrecked, lost, and gone to pieces 
(as is made manifest to the patriotism of Sir Leicester Dedlock) 
because you can't provide for Noodle!

On the other hand, the Right Honourable William Buffy, M.P., 
contends across the table with some one else that the shipwreck of 
the country--about which there is no doubt; it is only the manner of 
it that is in question--is attributable to Cuffy.  If you had done 
with Cuffy what you ought to have done when he first came into 
Parliament, and had prevented him from going over to Duffy, you 
would have got him into alliance with Fuffy, you would have had with 
you the weight attaching as a smart debater to Guffy, you would have 
brought to bear upon the elections the wealth of Huffy, you would 
have got in for three counties Juffy, Kuffy, and Luffy, and you 
would have strengthened your administration by the official 
knowledge and the business habits of Muffy.  All this, instead of 
being as you now are, dependent on the mere caprice of Puffy!

As to this point, and as to some minor topics, there are differences 
of opinion; but it is perfectly clear to the brilliant and 
distinguished circle, all round, that nobody is in question but 
Boodle and his retinue, and Buffy and HIS retinue.  These are the 
great actors for whom the stage is reserved.  A People there are, no 
doubt--a certain large number of supernumeraries, who are to be 
occasionally addressed, and relied upon for shouts and choruses, as 
on the theatrical stage; but Boodle and Buffy, their followers and 
families, their heirs, executors, administrators, and assigns, are 
the born first-actors, managers, and leaders, and no others can 
appear upon the scene for ever and ever.

In this, too, there is perhaps more dandyism at Chesney Wold than 
the brilliant and distinguished circle will find good for itself in 
the long run.  For it is, even with the stillest and politest 
circles, as with the circle the necromancer draws around him--very 
strange appearances may be seen in active motion outside.  With this 
difference, that being realities and not phantoms, there is the 
greater danger of their breaking in.

Chesney Wold is quite full anyhow, so full that a burning sense of 
injury arises in the breasts of ill-lodged ladies'-maids, and is not 
to he extinguished.  Only one room is empty.  It is a turret chamber 
of the third order of merit, plainly but comfortably furnished and 
having an old-fashioned business air.  It is Mr. Tulkinghorn's room, 
and is never bestowed on anybody else, for he may come at any time.  
He is not come yet.  It is his quiet habit to walk across the park 
from the village in fine weather, to drop into this room as if he 
had never been out of it since he was last seen there, to request a 
servant to inform Sir Leicester that he is arrived in case he should 
be wanted, and to appear ten minutes before dinner in the shadow of 
the library-door.  He sleeps in his turret with a complaining flag-
staff over his head, and has some leads outside on which, any fine 
morning when he is down here, his black figure may be seen walking 
before breakfast like a larger species of rook.

Every day before dinner, my Lady looks for him in the dusk of the 
library, but he is not there.  Every day at dinner, my Lady glances 
down the table for the vacant place that would be waiting to receive 
him if he had just arrived, but there is no vacant place.  Every 
night my Lady casually asks her maid, "Is Mr. Tulkinghorn come?"

Every night the answer is, "No, my Lady, not yet."

One night, while having her hair undressed, my Lady loses herself in 
deep thought after this reply until she sees her own brooding face 
in the opposite glass, and a pair of black eyes curiously observing 
her.

"Be so good as to attend," says my Lady then, addressing the 
reflection of Hortense, "to your business.  You can contemplate your 
beauty at another time."

"Pardon!  It was your Ladyship's beauty."

"That," says my Lady, "you needn't contemplate at all."

At length, one afternoon a little before sunset, when the bright 
groups of figures which have for the last hour or two enlivened the 
Ghost's Walk are all dispersed and only Sir Leicester and my Lady 
remain upon the terrace, Mr. Tulkinghorn appears.  He comes towards 
them at his usual methodical pace, which is never quickened, never 
slackened.  He wears his usual expressionless mask--if it be a mask
--and carries family secrets in every limb of his body and every 
crease of his dress.  Whether his whole soul is devoted to the great 
or whether he yields them nothing beyond the services he sells is 
his personal secret.  He keeps it, as he keeps the secrets of his 
clients; he is his own client in that matter, and will never betray 
himself.

"How do you do, Mr. Tulkinghorn?" says Sir Leicester, giving him his 
hand.

Mr. Tulkinghorn is quite well.  Sir Leicester is quite well.  My 
Lady is quite well.  All highly satisfactory.  The lawyer, with his 
hands behind him, walks at Sir Leicester's side along the terrace.  
My Lady walks upon the other side.

"We expected you before," says Sir Leicester.  A gracious 
observation.  As much as to say, "Mr. Tulkinghorn, we remember your 
existence when you are not here to remind us of it by your presence.  
We bestow a fragment of our minds upon you, sir, you see!"

Mr. Tulkinghorn, comprehending it, inclines his head and says he is 
much obliged.

"I should have come down sooner," he explains, "but that I have been 
much engaged with those matters in the several suits between 
yourself and Boythorn."

"A man of a very ill-regulated mind," observes Sir Leicester with 
severity.  "An extremely dangerous person in any community.  A man 
of a very low character of mind."

"He is obstinate," says Mr. Tulkinghorn.

"It is natural to such a man to be so," says Sir Leicester, looking 
most profoundly obstinate himself.  "I am not at all surprised to 
hear it."

"The only question is," pursues the lawyer, "whether you will give 
up anything."

"No, sir," replies Sir Leicester.  "Nothing.  I give up?"

"I don't mean anything of importance.  That, of course, I know you 
would not abandon.  I mean any minor point."

"Mr. Tulkinghorn," returns Sir Leicester, "there can be no minor 
point between myself and Mr. Boythorn.  If I go farther, and observe 
that I cannot readily conceive how ANY right of mine can be a minor 
point, I speak not so much in reference to myself as an individual 
as in reference to the family position I have it in charge to 
maintain."

Mr. Tulkinghorn inclines his head again.  "I have now my 
instructions," he says.  "Mr. Boythorn will give us a good deal of 
trouble--"

"It is the character of such a mind, Mr. Tulkinghorn," Sir Leicester 
interrupts him, "TO give trouble.  An exceedingly ill-conditioned, 
levelling person.  A person who, fifty years ago, would probably 
have been tried at the Old Bailey for some demagogue proceeding, and 
severely punished--if not," adds Sir Leicester after a moment's 
pause, "if not hanged, drawn, and quartered."

Sir Leicester appears to discharge his stately breast of a burden in 
passing this capital sentence, as if it were the next satisfactory 
thing to having the sentence executed.

"But night is coming on," says he, "and my Lady will take cold.  My 
dear, let us go in."

As they turn towards the hall-door, Lady Dedlock addresses Mr. 
Tulkinghorn for the first time.

"You sent me a message respecting the person whose writing I 
happened to inquire about.  It was like you to remember the 
circumstance; I had quite forgotten it.  Your message reminded me of 
it again.  I can't imagine what association I had with a hand like 
that, but I surely had some."

"You had some?" Mr. Tulkinghorn repeats.

"Oh, yes!" returns my Lady carelessly.  "I think I must have had 
some.  And did you really take the trouble to find out the writer of 
that actual thing--what is it!--affidavit?"

"Yes."

"How very odd!"

They pass into a sombre breakfast-room on the ground floor, lighted 
in the day by two deep windows.  It is now twilight.  The fire glows 
brightly on the panelled wall and palely on the window-glass, where, 
through the cold reflection of the blaze, the colder landscape 
shudders in the wind and a grey mist creeps along, the only 
traveller besides the waste of clouds.

My Lady lounges in a great chair in the chimney-corner, and Sir 
Leicester takes another great chair opposite.  The lawyer stands 
before the fire with his hand out at arm's length, shading his face.  
He looks across his arm at my Lady.

"Yes," he says, "I inquired about the man, and found him.  And, what 
is very strange, I found him--"

"Not to be any out-of-the-way person, I am afraid!" Lady Dedlock 
languidly anticipates.

"I found him dead."

"Oh, dear me!" remonstrated Sir Leicester.  Not so much shocked by 
the fact as by the fact of the fact being mentioned.

"I was directed to his lodging--a miserable, poverty-stricken place
--and I found him dead."

"You will excuse me, Mr. Tulkinghorn," observes Sir Leicester.  "I 
think the less said--"

"Pray, Sir Leicester, let me hear the story out" (it is my Lady 
speaking).  "It is quite a story for twilight.  How very shocking!  
Dead?"

Mr, Tulkinghorn re-asserts it by another inclination of his head.  
"Whether by his own hand--"

"Upon my honour!" cries Sir Leicester.  "Really!"

"Do let me hear the story!" says my Lady.

"Whatever you desire, my dear.  But, I must say--"

"No, you mustn't say!  Go on, Mr. Tulkinghorn."

Sir Leicester's gallantry concedes the point, though he still feels 
that to bring this sort of squalor among the upper classes is 
really--really--

"I was about to say," resumes the lawyer with undisturbed calmness, 
"that whether he had died by his own hand or not, it was beyond my 
power to tell you.  I should amend that phrase, however, by saying 
that he had unquestionably died of his own act, though whether by 
his own deliberate intention or by mischance can never certainly be 
known.  The coroner's jury found that he took the poison 
accidentally."

"And what kind of man," my Lady asks, "was this deplorable 
creature?"

"Very difficult to say," returns the lawyer, shaking his bead.  "He 
had lived so wretchedly and was so neglected, with his gipsy colour 
and his wild black hair and beard, that I should have considered him 
the commonest of the common.  The surgeon had a notion that he had 
once been something better, both in appearance and condition."

"What did they call the wretched being?"

"They called him what he had called himself, but no one knew his 
name."

"Not even any one who had attended on him?"

"No one had attended on him.  He was found dead.  In fact, I found 
him."

"Without any clue to anything more?"

"Without any; there was," says the lawyer meditatively, "an old 
portmanteau, but--  No, there were no papers."

During the utterance of every word of this short dialogue, Lady 
Dedlock and Mr. Tulkinghorn, without any other alteration in their 
customary deportment, have looked very steadily at one another--as 
was natural, perhaps, in the discussion of so unusual a subject.  
Sir Leicester has looked at the fire, with the general expression of 
the Dedlock on the staircase.  The story being told, he renews his 
stately protest, saying that as it is quite clear that no 
association in my Lady's mind can possibly be traceable to this poor 
wretch (unless he was a begging-letter writer), he trusts to hear no 
more about a subject so far removed from my Lady's station.

"Certainly, a collection of horrors," says my Lady, gathering up her 
mantles and furs, "but they interest one for the moment!  Have the 
kindness, Mr. Tulkinghorn, to open the door for me."

Mr. Tulkinghorn does so with deference and holds it open while she 
passes out.  She passes close to him, with her usual fatigued manner 
and insolent grace.  They meet again at dinner--again, next day--
again, for many days in succession.  Lady Dedlock is always the same 
exhausted deity, surrounded by worshippers, and terribly liable to 
be bored to death, even while presiding at her own shrine.  Mr. 
Tulkinghorn is always the same speechless repository of noble 
confidences, so oddly but of place and yet so perfectly at home.  
They appear to take as little note of one another as any two people 
enclosed within the same walls could.  But whether each evermore 
watches and suspects the other, evermore mistrustful of some great 
reservation; whether each is evermore prepared at all points for the 
other, and never to be taken unawares; what each would give to know 
how much the other knows--all this is hidden, for the time, in their 
own hearts.



CHAPTER XIII

Esther's Narrative


We held many consultations about what Richard was to be, first 
without Mr. Jarndyce, as he had requested, and afterwards with him, 
but it was a long time before we seemed to make progress.  Richard 
said he was ready for anything.  When Mr. Jarndyce doubted whether 
he might not already be too old to enter the Navy, Richard said he 
had thought of that, and perhaps he was.  When Mr. Jarndyce asked 
him what he thought of the Army, Richard said he had thought of 
that, too, and it wasn't a bad idea.  When Mr. Jarndyce advised him 
to try and decide within himself whether his old preference for the 
sea was an ordinary boyish inclination or a strong impulse, Richard 
answered, Well he really HAD tried very often, and he couldn't make 
out.

"How much of this indecision of character," Mr. Jarndyce said to me, 
"is chargeable on that incomprehensible heap of uncertainty and 
procrastination on which he has been thrown from his birth, I don't 
pretend to say; but that Chancery, among its other sins, is 
responsible for some of it, I can plainly see.  It has engendered or 
confirmed in him a habit of putting off--and trusting to this, that, 
and the other chance, without knowing what chance--and dismissing 
everything as unsettled, uncertain, and confused.  The character of 
much older and steadier people may be even changed by the 
circumstances surrounding them.  It would be too much to expect that 
a boy's, in its formation, should be the subject of such influences 
and escape them."

I felt this to be true; though if I may venture to mention what I 
thought besides, I thought it much to be regretted that Richard's 
education had not counteracted those influences or directed his 
character.  He had been eight years at a public school and had 
learnt, I understood, to make Latin verses of several sorts in the 
most admirable manner.  But I never heard that it had been anybody's 
business to find out what his natural bent was, or where his 
failings lay, or to adapt any kind of knowledge to HIM.  HE had been 
adapted to the verses and had learnt the art of making them to such 
perfection that if he had remained at school until he was of age, I 
suppose he could only have gone on making them over and over again 
unless he had enlarged his education by forgetting how to do it.  
Still, although I had no doubt that they were very beautiful, and 
very improving, and very sufficient for a great many purposes of 
life, and always remembered all through life, I did doubt whether 
Richard would not have profited by some one studying him a little, 
instead of his studying them quite so much.

To be sure, I knew nothing of the subject and do not even now know 
whether the young gentlemen of classic Rome or Greece made verses to 
the same extent--or whether the young gentlemen of any country ever 
did.

"I haven't the least idea," said Richard, musing, "what I had better 
be.  Except that I am quite sure I don't want to go into the Church, 
it's a toss-up."

"You have no inclination in Mr. Kenge's way?" suggested Mr. 
Jarndyce.

"I don't know that, sir!" replied Richard.  "I am fond of boating.  
Articled clerks go a good deal on the water.  It's a capital 
profession!"

"Surgeon--" suggested Mr. Jarndyce.

"That's the thing, sir!" cried Richard.

I doubt if he had ever once thought of it before.

"That's the thing, sir," repeated Richard with the greatest 
enthusiasm.  "We have got it at last.  M.R.C.S.!"

He was not to be laughed out of it, though he laughed at it 
heartily.  He said he had chosen his profession, and the more he 
thought of it, the more he felt that his destiny was clear; the art 
of healing was the art of all others for him.  Mistrusting that he 
only came to this conclusion because, having never had much chance 
of finding out for himself what he was fitted for and having never 
been guided to the discovery, he was taken by the newest idea and 
was glad to get rid of the trouble of consideration, I wondered 
whether the Latin verses often ended in this or whether Richard's 
was a solitary case.

Mr. Jarndyce took great pains to talk with him seriously and to put 
it to his good sense not to deceive himself in so important a 
matter.  Richard was a little grave after these interviews, but 
invariably told Ada and me that it was all right, and then began to 
talk about something else.

"By heaven!" cried Mr. Boythorn, who interested himself strongly in 
the subject--though I need not say that, for he could do nothing 
weakly; "I rejoice to find a young gentleman of spirit and gallantry 
devoting himself to that noble profession!  The more spirit there is 
in it, the better for mankind and the worse for those mercenary 
task-masters and low tricksters who delight in putting that 
illustrious art at a disadvantage in the world.  By all that is base 
and despicable," cried Mr. Boythorn, "the treatment of surgeons 
aboard ship is such that I would submit the legs--both legs--of 
every member of the Admiralty Board to a compound fracture and 
render it a transportable offence in any qualified practitioner to 
set them if the system were not wholly changed in eight and forty 
hours!"

"Wouldn't you give them a week?" asked Mr. Jarndyce.

"No!" cried Mr. Boythorn firmly.  "Not on any consideration!  Eight 
and forty hours!  As to corporations, parishes, vestry-boards, and 
similar gatherings of jolter-headed clods who assemble to exchange 
such speeches that, by heaven, they ought to be worked in 
quicksilver mines for the short remainder of their miserable 
existence, if it were only to prevent their detestable English from 
contaminating a language spoken in the presence of the sun--as to 
those fellows, who meanly take advantage of the ardour of gentlemen 
in the pursuit of knowledge to recompense the inestimable services 
of the best years of their lives, their long study, and their 
expensive education with pittances too small for the acceptance of 
clerks, I would have the necks of every one of them wrung and their 
skulls arranged in Surgeons' Hall for the contemplation of the whole 
profession in order that its younger members might understand from 
actual measurement, in early life, HOW thick skulls may become!"

He wound up this vehement declaration by looking round upon us with 
a most agreeable smile and suddenly thundering, "Ha, ha, ha!" over 
and over again, until anybody else might have been expected to be 
quite subdued by the exertion.

As Richard still continued to say that he was fixed in his choice 
after repeated periods for consideration had been recommended by Mr. 
Jarndyce and had expired, and he still continued to assure Ada and 
me in the same final manner that it was "all right," it became 
advisable to take Mr. Kenge into council.  Mr. Kenge, therefore, 
came down to dinner one day, and leaned back in his chair, and 
turned his eye-glasses over and over, and spoke in a sonorous voice, 
and did exactly what I remembered to have seen him do when I was a 
little girl.

"Ah!" said Mr. Kenge.  "Yes.  Well!  A very good profession, Mr. 
Jarndyce, a very good profession."

"The course of study and preparation requires to be diligently 
pursued," observed my guardian with a glance at Richard.

"Oh, no doubt," said Mr. Kenge.  "Diligently."

"But that being the case, more or less, with all pursuits that are 
worth much," said Mr. Jarndyce, "it is not a special consideration 
which another choice would be likely to escape."

"Truly," said Mr. Kenge.  "And Mr. Richard Carstone, who has so 
meritoriously acquitted himself in the--shall I say the classic 
shades?--in which his youth had been passed, will, no doubt, apply 
the habits, if not the principles and practice, of versification in 
that tongue in which a poet was said (unless I mistake) to be born, 
not made, to the more eminently practical field of action on which 
he enters."

"You may rely upon it," said Richard in his off-hand manner, "that I 
shall go at it and do my best."

"Very well, Mr. Jarndyce!" said Mr. Kenge, gently nodding his head.  
"Really, when we are assured by Mr. Richard that he means to go at 
it and to do his best," nodding feelingly and smoothly over those 
expressions, "I would submit to you that we have only to inquire 
into the best mode of carrying out the object of his ambition.  Now, 
with reference to placing Mr. Richard with some sufficiently eminent 
practitioner.  Is there any one in view at present?"

"No one, Rick, I think?" said my guardian.

"No one, sir," said Richard.

"Quite so!" observed Mr. Kenge.  "As to situation, now.  Is there 
any particular feeling on that head?"

"N--no," said Richard.

"Quite so!" observed Mr. Kenge again.

"I should like a little variety," said Richard; "I mean a good range 
of experience."

"Very requisite, no doubt," returned Mr. Kenge.  "I think this may 
be easily arranged, Mr. Jarndyce?  We have only, in the first place, 
to discover a sufficiently eligible practitioner; and as soon as we 
make our want--and shall I add, our ability to pay a premium?--
known, our only difficulty will be in the selection of one from a 
large number.  We have only, in the second place, to observe those 
little formalities which are rendered necessary by our time of life 
and our being under the guardianship of the court.  We shall soon 
be--shall I say, in Mr. Richard's own light-hearted manner, 'going 
at it'--to our heart's content.  It is a coincidence," said Mr. 
Kenge with a tinge of melancholy in his smile, "one of those 
coincidences which may or may not require an explanation beyond our 
present limited faculties, that I have a cousin in the medical 
profession.  He might be deemed eligible by you and might be 
disposed to respond to this proposal.  I can answer for him as 
little as for you, but he MIGHT!"

As this was an opening in the prospect, it was arranged that Mr. 
Kenge should see his cousin.  And as Mr. Jarndyce had before 
proposed to take us to London for a few weeks, it was settled next 
day that we should make our visit at once and combine Richard's 
business with it.

Mr. Boythorn leaving us within a week, we took up our abode at a 
cheerful lodging near Oxford Street over an upholsterer's shop.  
London was a great wonder to us, and we were out for hours and hours 
at a time, seeing the sights, which appeared to be less capable of 
exhaustion than we were.  We made the round of the principal 
theatres, too, with great delight, and saw all the plays that were 
worth seeing.  I mention this because it was at the theatre that I 
began to be made uncomfortable again by Mr. Guppy.

I was sitting in front of the box one night with Ada, and Richard 
was in the place he liked best, behind Ada's chair, when, happening 
to look down into the pit, I saw Mr. Guppy, with his hair flattened 
down upon his head and woe depicted in his face, looking up at me.  
I felt all through the performance that he never looked at the 
actors but constantly looked at me, and always with a carefully 
prepared expression of the deepest misery and the profoundest 
dejection.

It quite spoiled my pleasure for that night because it was so very 
embarrassing and so very ridiculous.  But from that time forth, we 
never went to the play without my seeing Mr. Guppy in the pit, 
always with his hair straight and flat, his shirt-collar turned 
down, and a general feebleness about him.  If he were not there when 
we went in, and I began to hope he would not come and yielded myself 
for a little while to the interest of the scene, I was certain to 
encounter his languishing eyes when I least expected it and, from 
that time, to be quite sure that they were fixed upon me all the 
evening.

I really cannot express how uneasy this made me.  If he would only 
have brushed up his hair or turned up his collar, it would have been 
bad enough; but to know that that absurd figure was always gazing at 
me, and always in that demonstrative state of despondency, put such 
a constraint upon me that I did not like to laugh at the play, or to 
cry at it, or to move, or to speak.  I seemed able to do nothing 
naturally.  As to escaping Mr. Guppy by going to the back of the 
box, I could not bear to do that because I knew Richard and Ada 
relied on having me next them and that they could never have talked 
together so happily if anybody else had been in my place.  So there 
I sat, not knowing where to look--for wherever I looked, I knew Mr. 
Guppy's eyes were following me--and thinking of the dreadful expense 
to which this young man was putting himself on my account.

Sometimes I thought of telling Mr. Jarndyce.  Then I feared that the 
young man would lose his situation and that I might ruin him.  
Sometimes I thought of confiding in Richard, but was deterred by the 
possibility of his fighting Mr. Guppy and giving him black eyes.  
Sometimes I thought, should I frown at him or shake my head.  Then I 
felt I could not do it.  Sometimes I considered whether I should 
write to his mother, but that ended in my being convinced that to 
open a correspondence would he to make the matter worse.  I always 
came to the conclusion, finally, that I could do nothing.  Mr. 
Guppy's perseverance, all this time, not only produced him regularly 
at any theatre to which we went, but caused him to appear in the 
crowd as we were coming out, and even to get up behind our fly--
where I am sure I saw him, two or three times, struggling among the 
most dreadful spikes.  After we got home, he haunted a post opposite 
our house.  The upholsterer's where we lodged being at the corner of 
two streets, and my bedroom window being opposite the post, I was 
afraid to go near the window when I went upstairs, lest I should see 
him (as I did one moonlight night) leaning against the post and 
evidenfly catching cold.  If Mr. Guppy had not been, fortunately for 
me, engaged in the daytime, I really should have had no rest from 
him.

While we were making this round of gaieties, in which Mr. Guppy so 
extraordinarily participated, the business which had helped to bring 
us to town was not neglected.  Mr. Kenge's cousin was a Mr. Bayham 
Badger, who had a good practice at Chelsea and attended a large 
public institution besides.  He was quite willing to receive Richard 
into his house and to superintend his studies, and as it seemed that 
those could be pursued advantageously under Mr. Badger's roof, and 
Mr. Badger liked Richard, and as Richard said he liked Mr. Badger 
"well enough," an agreement was made, the Lord Chancellor's consent 
was obtained, and it was all settled.

On the day when matters were concluded between Richard and Mr. 
Badger, we were all under engagement to dine at Mr. Badger's house.  
We were to be "merely a family party," Mrs. Badger's note said; and 
we found no lady there but Mrs. Badger herself.  She was surrounded 
in the drawing-room by various objects, indicative of her painting a 
little, playing the piano a little, playing the guitar a little, 
playing the harp a little, singing a little, working a little, 
reading a little, writing poetry a little, and botanizing a little.  
She was a lady of about fifty, I should think, youthfully dressed, 
and of a very fine complexion.  If I add to the little list of her 
accomplishments that she rouged a little, I do not mean that there 
was any harm in it.

Mr. Bayham Badger himself was a pink, fresh-faced, crisp-looking 
gentleman with a weak voice, white teeth, light hair, and surprised 
eyes, some years younger, I should say, than Mrs. Bayham Badger.  He 
admired her exceedingly, but principally, and to begin with, on the 
curious ground (as it seemed to us) of her having had three 
husbands.  We had barely taken our seats when he said to Mr. 
Jarndyce quite triumphantly, "You would hardly suppose that I am 
Mrs. Bayham Badger's third!"

"Indeed?" said Mr. Jarndyce.

"Her third!" said Mr. Badger.  "Mrs. Bayham Badger has not the 
appearance, Miss Summerson, of a lady who has had two former 
husbands?"

I said "Not at all!"

"And most remarkable men!" said Mr. Badger in a tone of confidence.  
"Captain Swosser of the Royal Navy, who was Mrs. Badger's first 
husband, was a very distinguished officer indeed.  The name of 
Professor Dingo, my immediate predecessor, is one of European 
reputation."

Mrs. Badger overheard him and smiled.

"Yes, my dear!" Mr. Badger replied to the smile, "I was observing to 
Mr. Jarndyce and Miss Summerson that you had had two former 
husbands--both very distinguished men.  And they found it, as people 
generally do, difficult to believe."

"I was barely twenty," said Mrs. Badger, "when I married Captain 
Swosser of the Royal Navy.  I was in the Mediterranean with him; I 
am quite a sailor.  On the twelfth anniversary of my wedding-day, I 
became the wife of Professor Dingo."

"Of European reputation," added Mr. Badger in an undertone.

"And when Mr. Badger and myself were married," pursued Mrs. Badger, 
"we were married on the same day of the year.  I had become attached 
to the day."

"So that Mrs. Badger has been married to three husbands--two of them 
highly distinguished men," said Mr. Badger, summing up the facts, 
"and each time upon the twenty-first of March at eleven in the 
forenoon!"

We all expressed our admiration.

"But for Mr. Badger's modesty," said Mr. Jarndyce, "I would take 
leave to correct him and say three distinguished men."

"Thank you, Mr. Jarndyce!  What I always tell him!" observed Mrs. 
Badger.

"And, my dear," said Mr. Badger, "what do I always tell you?  That 
without any affectation of disparaging such professional distinction 
as I may have attained (which our friend Mr. Carstone will have many 
opportunities of estimating), I am not so weak--no, really," said 
Mr. Badger to us generally, "so unreasonable--as to put my 
reputation on the same footing with such first-rate men as Captain 
Swosser and Professor Dingo.  Perhaps you may be interested, Mr. 
Jarndyce," continued Mr. Bayham Badger, leading the way into the 
next drawing-room, "in this portrait of Captain Swosser.  It was 
taken on his return home from the African station, where he had 
suffered from the fever of the country.  Mrs. Badger considers it 
too yellow.  But it's a very fine head.  A very fine head!"

We all echoed, "A very fine head!"

"I feel when I look at it," said Mr. Badger, "'That's a man I should 
like to have seen!'  It strikingly bespeaks the first-class man that 
Captain Swosser pre-eminently was.  On the other side, Professor 
Dingo.  I knew him well--attended him in his last illness--a 
speaking likeness!  Over the piano, Mrs. Bayham Badger when Mrs. 
Swosser.  Over the sofa, Mrs. Bayham Badger when Mrs. Dingo.  Of 
Mrs. Bayham Badger IN ESSE, I possess the original and have no 
copy."

Dinner was now announced, and we went downstairs.  It was a very 
genteel entertainment, very handsomely served.  But the captain and 
the professor still ran in Mr. Badger's head, and as Ada and I had 
the honour of being under his particular care, we had the full 
benefit of them.

"Water, Miss Summerson?  Allow me!  Not in that tumbler, pray.  
Bring me the professor's goblet, James!"

Ada very much admired some artificial flowers under a glass.

"Astonishing how they keep!" said Mr. Badger.  "They were presented 
to Mrs. Bayham Badger when she was in the Mediterranean."

He invited Mr. Jarndyce to take a glass of claret.

"Not that claret!" he said.  "Excuse me!  This is an occasion, and 
ON an occasion I produce some very special claret I happen to have.  
(James, Captain Swosser's wine!)  Mr. Jarndyce, this is a wine that 
was imported by the captain, we will not say how many years ago.  
You will find it very curious.  My dear, I shall he happy to take 
some of this wine with you.  (Captain Swosser's claret to your 
mistress, James!)  My love, your health!"

After dinner, when we ladies retired, we took Mrs. Badger's first 
and second husband with us.  Mrs. Badger gave us in the drawing-room 
a biographical sketch of the life and services of Captain Swosser 
before his marriage and a more minute account of him dating from the 
time when he fell in love with her at a ball on board the Crippler, 
given to the officers of that ship when she lay in Plymouth Harbour.

"The dear old Crippler!" said Mrs. Badger, shaking her head.  "She 
was a noble vessel.  Trim, ship-shape, all a taunto, as Captain 
Swosser used to say.  You must excuse me if I occasionally introduce 
a nautical expression; I was quite a sailor once.  Captain Swosser 
loved that craft for my sake.  When she was no longer in commission, 
he frequently said that if he were rich enough to buy her old hulk, 
he would have an inscription let into the timbers of the quarter-
deck where we stood as partners in the dance to mark the spot where 
he fell--raked fore and aft (Captain Swosser used to say) by the 
fire from my tops.  It was his naval way of mentioning my eyes."

Mrs. Badger shook her head, sighed, and looked in the glass.

"It was a great change from Captain Swosser to Professor Dingo," she 
resumed with a plaintive smile.  "I felt it a good deal at first.  
Such an entire revolution in my mode of life!  But custom, combined 
with science--particularly science--inured me to it.  Being the 
professor's sole companion in his botanical excursions, I almost 
forgot that I had ever been afloat, and became quite learned.  It is 
singular that the professor was the antipodes of Captain Swosser and 
that Mr. Badger is not in the least like either!"

We then passed into a narrative of the deaths of Captain Swosser and 
Professor Dingo, both of whom seem to have had very bad complaints.  
In the course of it, Mrs. Badger signified to us that she had never 
madly loved but once and that the object of that wild affection, 
never to be recalled in its fresh enthusiasm, was Captain Swosser.  
The professor was yet dying by inches in the most dismal manner, and 
Mrs. Badger was giving us imitations of his way of saying, with 
great difficulty, "Where is Laura?  Let Laura give me my toast and 
water!" when the entrance of the gentlemen consigned him to the 
tomb.

Now, I observed that evening, as I had observed for some days past, 
that Ada and Richard were more than ever attached to each other's 
society, which was but natural, seeing that they were going to be 
separated so soon.  I was therefore not very much surprised when we 
got home, and Ada and I retired upstairs, to find Ada more silent 
than usual, though I was not quite prepared for her coming into my 
arms and beginning to speak to me, with her face hidden.

"My darling Esther!" murmured Ada.  "I have a great secret to tell 
you!"

A mighty secret, my pretty one, no doubt!

"What is it, Ada?"

"Oh, Esther, you would never guess!"

"Shall I try to guess?" said I.

"Oh, no!  Don't!  Pray don't!" cried Ada, very much startled by the 
idea of my doing so.

"Now, I wonder who it can be about?" said I, pretending to consider.

"It's about--" said Ada in a whisper.  "It's about--my cousin 
Richard!"

"Well, my own!" said I, kissing her bright hair, which was all I 
could see.  "And what about him?"

"Oh, Esther, you would never guess!"

It was so pretty to have her clinging to me in that way, hiding her 
face, and to know that she was not crying in sorrow but in a little 
glow of joy, and pride, and hope, that I would not help her just 
yet.

"He says--I know it's very foolish, we are both so young--but he 
says," with a burst of tears, "that he loves me dearly, Esther."

"Does he indeed?" said I.  "I never heard of such a thing!  Why, my 
pet of pets, I could have told you that weeks and weeks ago!"

To see Ada lift up her flushed face in joyful surprise, and hold me 
round the neck, and laugh, and cry, and blush, was so pleasant!

"Why, my darling," said I, "what a goose you must take me for!  Your 
cousin Richard has been loving you as plainly as he could for I 
don't know how long!"

"And yet you never said a word about it!" cried Ada, kissing me.

"No, my love," said I.  "I waited to be told."

"But now I have told you, you don't think it wrong of me, do you?" 
returned Ada.  She might have coaxed me to say no if I had been the 
hardest-hearted duenna in the world.  Not being that yet, I said no 
very freely.

"And now," said I, "I know the worst of it."

"Oh, that's not quite the worst of it, Esther dear!" cried Ada, 
holding me tighter and laying down her face again upon my breast.

"No?" said I.  "Not even that?"

"No, not even that!" said Ada, shaking her head.

"Why, you never mean to say--" I was beginning in joke.

But Ada, looking up and smiling through her tear's, cried, "Yes, I 
do!  You know, you know I do!" And then sobbed out, "With all my 
heart I do!  With all my whole heart, Esther!"

I told her, laughing, why I had known that, too, just as well as I 
had known the other!  And we sat before the fire, and I had all the 
talking to myself for a little while (though there was not much of 
it); and Ada was soon quiet and happy.

"Do you think my cousin John knows, dear Dame Durden?" she asked.

"Unless my cousin John is blind, my pet," said I, "I should think my 
cousin John knows pretty well as much as we know."

"We want to speak to him before Richard goes," said Ada timidly, 
"and we wanted you to advise us, and to tell him so.  Perhaps you 
wouldn't mind Richard's coming in, Dame Durden?"

"Oh!  Richard is outside, is he, my dear?" said I.

"I am not quite certain," returned Ada with a bashful simplicity 
that would have won my heart if she had not won it long before, "but 
I think he's waiting at the door."

There he was, of course.  They brought a chair on either side of me, 
and put me between them, and really seemed to have fallen in love 
with me instead of one another, they were so confiding, and so 
trustful, and so fond of me.  They went on in their own wild way for 
a little while--I never stopped them; I enjoyed it too much myself--
and then we gradually fell to considering how young they were, and 
how there must be a lapse of several years before this early love 
could come to anything, and how it could come to happiness only if 
it were real and lasting and inspired them with a steady resolution 
to do their duty to each other, with constancy, fortitude, and 
perseverance, each always for the other's sake.  Well!  Richard said 
that he would work his fingers to the bone for Ada, and Ada said 
that she would work her fingers to the bone for Richard, and they 
called me all sorts of endearing and sensible names, and we sat 
there, advising and talking, half the night.  Finally, before we 
parted, I gave them my promise to speak to their cousin John to-
morrow.

So, when to-morrow came, I went to my guardian after breakfast, in 
the room that was our town-substitute for the growlery, and told him 
that I had it in trust to tell him something.

"Well, little woman," said he, shutting up his book, "if you have 
accepted the trust, there can be no harm in it."

"I hope not, guardian," said I.  "I can guarantee that there is no 
secrecy in it.  For it only happened yesterday."

"Aye?  And what is it, Esther?"

"Guardian," said I, "you remember the happy night when first we came 
down to Bleak House?  When Ada was singing in the dark room?"

I wished to call to his remembrance the look he had given me then.  
Unless I am much mistaken, I saw that I did so.

"Because--" said I with a little hesitation.

"Yes, my dear!" said he.  "Don't hurry."

"Because," said I, "Ada and Richard have fallen in love.  And have 
told each other so."

"Already!" cried my guardian, quite astonished.

"Yes!" said I.  "And to tell you the truth, guardian, I rather 
expected it."

"The deuce you did!" said he.

He sat considering for a minute or two, with his smile, at once so 
handsome and so kind, upon his changing face, and then requested me 
to let them know that he wished to see them.  When they came, he 
encircled Ada with one arm in his fatherly way and addressed himself 
to Richard with a cheerful gravity.

"Rick," said Mr. Jarndyce, "I am glad to have won your confidence.  
I hope to preserve it.  When I contemplated these relations between 
us four which have so brightened my life and so invested it with new 
interests and pleasures, I certainly did contemplate, afar off, the 
possibility of you and your pretty cousin here (don't be shy, Ada, 
don't be shy, my dear!) being in a mind to go through life together.  
I saw, and do see, many reasons to make it desirable.  But that was 
afar off, Rick, afar off!"

"We look afar off, sir," returned Richard.

"Well!" said Mr. Jarndyce.  "That's rational.  Now, hear me, my 
dears!  I might tell you that you don't know your own minds yet, 
that a thousand things may happen to divert you from one another, 
that it is well this chain of flowers you have taken up is very 
easily broken, or it might become a chain of lead.  But I will not 
do that.  Such wisdom will come soon enough, I dare say, if it is to 
come at all.  I will assume that a few years hence you will be in 
your hearts to one another what you are to-day.  All I say before 
speaking to you according to that assumption is, if you DO change--
if you DO come to find that you are more commonplace cousins to each 
other as man and woman than you were as boy and girl (your manhood 
will excuse me, Rick!)--don't be ashamed still to confide in me, for 
there will be nothing monstrous or uncommon in it.  I am only your 
friend and distant kinsman.  I have no power over you whatever.  But 
I wish and hope to retain your confidence if I do nothing to forfeit 
it."

"I am very sure, sir," returned Richard, "that I speak for Ada too 
when I say that you have the strongest power over us both--rooted in 
respect, gratitude, and affection--strengthening every day."

"Dear cousin John," said Ada, on his shoulder, "my father's place 
can never be empty again.  All the love and duty I could ever have 
rendered to him is transferred to you."

"Come!" said Mr. Jarndyce.  "Now for our assumption.  Now we lift 
our eyes up and look hopefully at the distance!  Rick, the world is 
before you; and it is most probable that as you enter it, so it will 
receive you.  Trust in nothing but in Providence and your own 
efforts.  Never separate the two, like the heathen waggoner.  
Constancy in love is a good thing, but it means nothing, and is 
nothing, without constancy in every kind of effort.  If you had the 
abilities of all the great men, past and present, you could do 
nothing well without sincerely meaning it and setting about it.  If 
you entertain the supposition that any real success, in great things 
or in small, ever was or could be, ever will or can be, wrested from 
Fortune by fits and starts, leave that wrong idea here or leave your 
cousin Ada here."

"I will leave IT here, sir," replied Richard smiling, "if I brought 
it here just now (but I hope I did not), and will work my way on to 
my cousin Ada in the hopeful distance."

"Right!" said Mr. Jarndyce.  "If you are not to make her happy, why 
should you pursue her?"

"I wouldn't make her unhappy--no, not even for her love," retorted 
Richard proudly.

"Well said!" cried Mr. Jarndyce.  "That's well said!  She remains 
here, in her home with me.  Love her, Rick, in your active life, no 
less than in her home when you revisit it, and all will go well.  
Otherwise, all will go ill.  That's the end of my preaching.  I 
think you and Ada had better take a walk."

Ada tenderly embraced him, and Richard heartily shook hands with 
him, and then the cousins went out of the room, looking back again 
directly, though, to say that they would wait for me.

The door stood open, and we both followed them with our eyes as 
they passed down the adjoining room, on which the sun was shining, 
and out at its farther end.  Richard with his head bent, and her 
hand drawn through his arm, was talking to her very earnestly; and 
she looked up in his face, listening, and seemed to see nothing 
else.  So young, so beautiful, so full of hope and promise, they 
went on lightly through the sunlight as their own happy thoughts 
might then be traversing the years to come and making them all 
years of brightness.  So they passed away into the shadow and were 
gone.  It was only a burst of light that had been so radiant.  The 
room darkened as they went out, and the sun was clouded over.

"Am I right, Esther?" said my guardian when they were gone.

He was so good and wise to ask ME whether he was right!

"Rick may gain, out of this, the quality he wants.  Wants, at the 
core of so much that is good!" said Mr. Jarndyce, shaking his head.  
"I have said nothing to Ada, Esther.  She has her friend and 
counsellor always near."  And he laid his hand lovingly upon my 
head.

I could not help showing that I was a little moved, though I did 
all I could to conceal it.

"Tut tut!" said he.  "But we must take care, too, that our little 
woman's life is not all consumed in care for others."

"Care?  My dear guardian, I believe I am the happiest creature in 
the world!"

"I believe so, too," said he.  "But some one may find out what 
Esther never will--that the little woman is to be held in 
remembrance above all other people!"

I have omitted to mention in its place that there was some one else 
at the family dinner party.  It was not a lady.  It was a 
gentleman.  It was a gentleman of a dark complexion--a young 
surgeon.  He was rather reserved, but I thought him very sensible 
and agreeable.  At least, Ada asked me if I did not, and I said 
yes.



CHAPTER XIV

Deportment


Richard left us on the very next evening to begin his new career, 
and committed Ada to my charge with great love for her and great 
trust in me.  It touched me then to reflect, and it touches me now, 
more nearly, to remember (having what I have to tell) how they both 
thought of me, even at that engrossing time.  I was a part of all 
their plans, for the present and the future, I was to write Richard 
once a week, making my faithful report of Ada, who was to write to 
him every alternate day.  I was to be informed, under his own hand, 
of all his labours and successes; I was to observe how resolute and 
persevering he would be; I was to be Ada's bridesmaid when they 
were married; I was to live with them afterwards; I was to keep all 
the keys of their house; I was to be made happy for ever and a day.

"And if the suit SHOULD make us rich, Esther--which it may, you 
know!" said Richard to crown all.

A shade crossed Ada's face.

"My dearest Ada," asked Richard, "why not?"

"It had better declare us poor at once," said Ada.

"Oh! I don't know about that," returned Richard, "but at all 
events, it won't declare anything at once.  It hasn't declared 
anything in heaven knows how many years."

"Too true," said Ada.

"Yes, but," urged Richard, answering what her look suggested rather 
than her words, "the longer it goes on, dcar cousin, the nearer it 
must be to a settlement one way or other.  Now, is not that 
reasonable?"

"You know best, Richard.  But I am afraid if we trust to it, it 
will make us unhappy."

"But, my Ada, we are not going to trust to it!" cried Richard 
gaily.  "We know it better than to trust to it.  We only say that 
if it SHOULD make us rich, we have no constitutional objection to 
being rich.  The court is, by solemn settlement of law, our grim 
old guardian, and we are to suppose that what it gives us (when it 
gives us anything) is our right.  It is not necessary to quarrel 
with our right."

"No," Said Ada, "but it may be better to forget all about it."

"Well, well," cried Richard, "then we will forget all about it!  We 
consign the whole thing to oblivion.  Dame Durden puts on her 
approving face, and it's done!"

"Dame Durden's approving face," said I, looking out of the box in 
which I was packing his books, "was not very visible when you 
called it by that name; but it does approve, and she thinks you 
can't do better."

So, Richard said there was an end of it, and immediately began, on 
no other foundation, to build as many castles in the air as would 
man the Great Wall of China.  He went away in high spirits.  Ada 
and I, prepared to miss him very much, commenced our quieter 
career.

On our arrival in London, we had called with Mr. Jarndyce at Mrs. 
Jellyby's but had not been so fortunate as to find her at home.  It 
appeared that she had gone somewhere to a tea-drinking and had 
taken Miss Jellyby with her.  Besides the tea-drinking, there was 
to be some considerable speech-making and letter-writing on the 
general merits of the cultivation of coffee, conjointly with 
natives, at the Settlement of Borrioboola-Gha.  All this involved, 
no doubt, sufficient active exercise of pen and ink to make her 
daughter's part in the proceedings anything but a holiday.

It being now beyond the time appointed for Mrs. Jellyby's return, 
we called again.  She was in town, but not at home, having gone to 
Mile End directly after breakfast on some Borrioboolan business, 
arising out of a society called the East London Branch Aid 
Ramification.  As I had not seen Peepy on the occasion of our last 
call (when he was not to be found anywhere, and when the cook 
rather thought he must have strolled away with the dustman's cart), 
I now inquired for him again.  The oyster shells he had been 
building a house with were still in the passage, but he was nowhere 
discoverable, and the cook supposed that he had "gone after the 
sheep."  When we repeated, with some surprise, "The sheep?" she 
said, Oh, yes, on market days he sometimes followed them quite out 
of town and came back in such a state as never was!

I was sitting at the window with my guardian on the following 
morning, and Ada was busy writing-of course to Richard--when Miss 
Jellyby was announced, and entered, leading the identical Peepy, 
whom she had made some endeavours to render presentable by wiping 
the dirt into corners of his face and hands and making his hair 
very wet and then violently frizzling it with her fingers.  
Everything the dear child wore was either too large for him or too 
small.  Among his other contradictory decorations he had the hat of 
a bishop and the little gloves of a baby.  His boots were, on a 
small scale, the boots of a ploughman, while his legs, so crossed 
and recrossed with scratches that they looked like maps, were bare 
below a very short pair of plaid drawers finished off with two 
frills of perfectly different patterns.  The deficient buttons on 
his plaid frock had evidently been supplied from one of Mr. 
Jellyby's coats, they were so extremely brazen and so much too 
large.  Most extraordinary specimens of needlework appeared on 
several parts of his dress, where it had been hastily mended, and I 
recognized the same hand on Miss Jellyby's.  She was, however, 
unaccountably improved in her appearance and looked very pretty.  
She was conscious of poor little Peepy being but a failure after 
all her trouble, and she showed it as she came in by the way in 
which she glanced first at him and then at us.

"Oh, dear me!" said my guardian.  "Due east!"

Ada and I gave her a cordial welcome and presented her to Mr. 
Jarndyce, to whom she said as she sat down, "Ma's compliments, and 
she hopes you'll excuse her, because she's correcting proofs of the 
plan.  She's going to put out five thousand new circulars, and she 
knows you'll be interested to hear that.  I have brought one of 
them with me.  Ma's compliments."  With which she presented it 
sulkily enough.

"Thank you," said my guardian.  "I am much obliged to Mrs. Jellyby.  
Oh, dear me!  This is a very trying wind!"

We were busy with Peepy, taking off his clerical hat, asking him if 
he remembered us, and so on.  Peepy retired behind his elbow at 
first, but relented at the sight of sponge-cake and allowed me to 
take him on my lap, where he sat munching quietly.  Mr. Jarndyce 
then withdrawing into the temporary growlery, Miss Jellyby opened a 
conversation with her usual abruptness.

"We are going on just as bad as ever in Thavies Inn," said she.  "I 
have no peace of my life.  Talk of Africa!  I couldn't be worse off 
if I was a what's-his-name--man and a brother!"

I tried to say something soothing.

"Oh, it's of no use, Miss Summerson," exclaimed Miss Jellyby, 
"though I thank you for the kind intention all the same.  I know 
how I am used, and I am not to be talked over.  YOU wouldn't be 
talked over if you were used so.  Peepy, go and play at Wild Beasts 
under the piano!"

"I shan't!" said Peepy.

"Very well, you ungrateful, naughty, hard-hearted boy!" returned 
Miss Jellyby with tears in her eyes.  "I'll never take pains to 
dress you any more."

"Yes, I will go, Caddy!" cried Peepy, who was really a good child 
and who was so moved by his sister's vexation that he went at once.

"It seems a little thing to cry about," said poor Miss Jellyby 
apologetically, "but I am quite worn out.  I was directing the new 
circulars till two this morning.  I detest the whole thing so that 
that alone makes my head ache till I can't see out of my eyes.  And 
look at that poor unfortunate child!  Was there ever such a fright 
as he is!"

Peepy, happily unconscious of the defects in his appearance, sat on 
the carpet behind one of the legs of the piano, looking calmly out 
of his den at us while he ate his cake.

"I have sent him to the other end of the room," observed Miss 
Jellyby, drawing her chair nearer ours, "because I don't want him 
to hear the conversation.  Those little things are so sharp!  I was 
going to say, we really are going on worse than ever.  Pa will be a 
bankrupt before long, and then I hope Ma will be satisfied.  
There'll he nobody but Ma to thank for it."

We said we hoped Mr. Jellyby's affairs were not in so bad a state 
as that.

"It's of no use hoping, though it's very kind of you," returned 
Miss Jellyby, shaking her head.  "Pa told me only yesterday morning 
(and dreadfully unhappy he is) that he couldn't weather the storm.  
I should be surprised if he could.  When all our tradesmen send 
into our house any stuff they like, and the servants do what they 
like with it, and I have no time to improve things if I knew how, 
and Ma don't care about anything, I should like to make out how Pa 
is to weather the storm.  I declare if I was Pa, I'd run away."

"My dear!" said I, smiling.  "Your papa, no doubt, considers his 
family."

"Oh, yes, his family is all very fine, Miss Summerson," replied 
Miss Jellyby; "but what comfort is his family to him?  His family 
is nothing but bills, dirt, waste, noise, tumbles downstairs, 
confusion, and wretchedness.  His scrambling home, from week's end 
to week's end, is like one great washing-day--only nothing's 
washed!"

Miss Jellyby tapped her foot upon the floor and wiped her eyes.

"I am sure I pity Pa to that degree," she said, "and am so angry 
with Ma that I can't find words to express myself!  However, I am 
not going to bear it, I am determined.  I won't be a slave all my 
life, and I won't submit to be proposed to by Mr. Quale.  A pretty 
thing, indeed, to marry a philanthropist. As if I hadn't had enough 
of THAT!" said poor Miss Jellyby.

I must confess that I could not help feeling rather angry with Mrs. 
Jellyby myself, seeing and hearing this neglected girl and knowing 
how much of bitterly satirical truth there was in what she said.

"If it wasn't that we had been intimate when you stopped at our 
house," pursued Miss Jellyby, "I should have been ashamed to come 
here to-day, for I know what a figure I must seem to you two.  But 
as it is, I made up my mind to call, especially as I am not likely 
to see you again the next time you come to town."

She said this with such great significance that Ada and I glanced 
at one another, foreseeing something more.

"No!" said Miss Jellyby, shaking her head.  "Not at all likely!  I 
know I may trust you two.  I am sure you won't betray me.  I am 
engaged."

"Without their knowledge at home?" said I.

"Why, good gracious me, Miss Summerson," she returned, justifying 
herself in a fretful but not angry manner, "how can it be 
otherwise?  You know what Ma is--and I needn't make poor Pa more 
miserable by telling HIM."

"But would it not he adding to his unhappiness to marry without his 
knowledge or consent, my dear?" said I.

"No," said Miss Jellyby, softening.  ""I hope not.  I should try to 
make him happy and comfortable when he came to see me, and Peepy 
and the others should take it in turns to come and stay with me, 
and they should have some care taken of them then."

There was a good deal of affection in poor Caddy.  She softened 
more and more while saying this and cried so much over the unwonted 
little home-picture she had raised in her mind that Peepy, in his 
cave under the piano, was touched, and turned himself over on his 
back with loud lamentations.  It was not until I had brought him to 
kiss his sister, and had restored him to his place on my lap, and 
had shown him that Caddy was laughing (she laughed expressly for 
the purpose), that we could recall his peace of mind; even then it 
was for some time conditional on his taking us in turns by the chin 
and smoothing our faces all over with his hand.  At last, as his 
spirits were not equal to the piano, we put him on a chair to look 
out of window; and Miss Jellyby, holding him by one leg, resumed 
her confidence.

"It began in your coming to our house," she said.

We naturally asked how.

"I felt I was so awkward," she replied, "that I made up my mind to 
be improved in that respect at all events and to learn to dance.  I 
told Ma I was ashamed of myself, and I must be taught to dance.  Ma 
looked at me in that provoking way of hers as if I wasn't in sight, 
but I was quite determined to be taught to dance, and so I went to 
Mr. Turveydrop's Academy in Newman Street."

"And was it there, my dear--" I began.

"Yes, it was there," said Caddy, "and I am engaged to Mr. 
Turveydrop.  There are two Mr. Turveydrops, father and son.  My Mr. 
Turveydrop is the son, of course.  I only wish I had been better 
brought up and was likely to make him a better wife, for I am very 
fond of him."

"I am sorry to hear this," said I, "I must confess."

"I don't know why you should be sorry," she retorted a little 
anxiously, "but I am engaged to Mr. Turveydrop, whether or no, and 
he is very fond of me.  It's a secret as yet, even on his side, 
because old Mr. Turveydrop has a share in the connexion and it 
might break his heart or give him some other shock if he was told 
of it abruptly.  Old Mr. Turveydrop is a very gentlemanly man 
indeed--very gentlemanly."

"Does his wife know of it?" asked Ada.

"Old Mr. Turveydrop's wife, Miss Clare?" returned Miss Jellyby, 
opening her eyes.  "There's no such person.  He is a widower."

We were here interrupted by Peepy, whose leg had undergone so much 
on account of his sister's unconsciously jerking it like a bell-
rope whenever she was emphatic that the afflicted child now 
bemoaned his sufferings with a very low-spirited noise.  As he 
appealed to me for compassion, and as I was only a listener, I 
undertook to hold him.  Miss Jellyby proceeded, after begging 
Peepy's pardon with a kiss and assuring him that she hadn't meant 
to do it.

"That's the state of the case," said Caddy.  "If I ever blame 
myself, I still think it's Ma's fault.  We are to be married 
whenever we can, and then I shall go to Pa at the office and write 
to Ma.  It won't much agitate Ma; I am only pen and ink to HER.  
One great comfort is," said Caddy with a sob, "that I shall never 
hear of Africa after I am married.  Young Mr. Turveydrop hates it 
for my sake, and if old Mr. Turveydrop knows there is such a place, 
it's as much as he does."

"It was he who was very gentlemanly, I think!" said I.

"Very gentlemanly indeed," said Caddy.  "He is celebrated almost 
everywhere for his deportment."

"Does he teach?" asked Ada.

"No, he don't teach anything in particular," replied Caddy.  "But 
his deportment is beautiful."

Caddy went on to say with considerable hesitation and reluctance 
that there was one thing more she wished us to know, and felt we 
ought to know, and which she hoped would not offend us.  It was 
that she had improved her acquaintance with Miss Flite, the little 
crazy old lady, and that she frequently went there early in the 
morning and met her lover for a few minutes before breakfast--only 
for a few minutes.  "I go there at other times," said Caddy, "but 
Prince does not come then.  Young Mr. Turveydrop's name is Prince; 
I wish it wasn't, because it sounds like a dog, but of course be 
didn't christen himself.  Old Mr. Turveydrop had him christened 
Prince in remembrance of the Prince Regent.  Old Mr. Turveydrop 
adored the Prince Regent on account of his deportment.  I hope you 
won't think the worse of me for having made these little 
appointments at Miss Flite's, where I first went with you, because 
I like the poor thing for her own sake and I believe she likes me.  
If you could see young Mr. Turveydrop, I am sure you would think 
well of him--at least, I am sure you couldn't possibly think any 
ill of him.  I am going there now for my lesson.  I couldn't ask 
you to go with me, Miss Summerson; but if you would," said Caddy, 
who had said all this earnestly and tremblingly, "I should be very 
glad--very glad."

It happened that we had arranged with my guardian to go to Miss 
Flite's that day.  We had told him of our former visit, and our 
account had interested him; but something had always happened to 
prevent our going there again.  As I trusted that I might have 
sufficient influence with Miss Jellyby to prevent her taking any 
very rash step if I fully accepted the confidence she was so 
willing to place in me, poor girl, I proposed that she and I and 
Peepy should go to the academy and afterwards meet my guardian and 
Ada at Miss Flite's, whose name I now learnt for the first time.  
This was on condition that Miss Jellyby and Peepy should come back 
with us to dinner.  The last article of the agreement being 
joyfully acceded to by both, we smartened Peepy up a little with 
the assistance of a few pins, some soap and water, and a hair-
brush, and went out, bending our steps towards Newman Street, which 
was very near.

I found the academy established in a sufficiently dingy house at 
the corner of an archway, with busts in all the staircase windows.  
In the same house there were also established, as I gathered from 
the plates on the door, a drawing-master, a coal-merchant (there 
was, certainly, no room for his coals), and a lithographic artist.  
On the plate which, in size and situation, took precedence of all 
the rest, I read, MR. TURVEYDROP.  The door was open, and the hall 
was blocked up by a grand piano, a harp, and several other musical 
instruments in cases, all in progress of removal, and all looking 
rakish in the daylight.  Miss Jellyby informed me that the academy 
had been lent, last night, for a concert.

We went upstairs--it had been quite a fine house once, when it was 
anybody's business to keep it clean and fresh, and nobody's 
business to smoke in it all day--and into Mr. Turveydrop's great 
room, which was built out into a mews at the back and was lighted 
by a skylight.  It was a bare, resounding room smelling of stables, 
with cane forms along the walls, and the walls ornamented at 
regular intervals with painted lyres and little cut-glass branches 
for candles, which seemed to be shedding their old-fashioned drops 
as other branches might shed autumn leaves.  Several young lady 
pupils, ranging from thirteen or fourteen years of age to two or 
three and twenty, were assembled; and I was looking among them for 
their instructor when Caddy, pinching my arm, repeated the ceremony 
of introduction.  "Miss Summerson, Mr. Prince Turveydrop!"

I curtsied to a little blue-eyed fair man of youthful appearance 
with flaxen hair parted in the middle and curling at the ends all 
round his head.  He had a little fiddle, which we used to call at 
school a kit, under his left arm, and its little bow in the same 
hand.  His little dancing-shoes were particularly diminutive, and 
he had a little innocent, feminine manner which not only appealed 
to me in an amiable way, but made this singular effect upon me, 
that I received the impression that he was like his mother and that 
his mother had not been much considered or well used.

"I am very happy to see Miss Jellyby's friend," he said, bowing low 
to me.  "I began to fear," with timid tenderness, "as it was past 
the usual time, that Miss Jellyby was not coming."

"I beg you will have the goodness to attribute that to me, who have 
detained her, and to receive my excuses, sir," said I.

"Oh, dear!" said he.

"And pray," I entreated, "do not allow me to be the cause of any 
more delay."

With that apology I withdrew to a seat between Peepy (who, being 
well used to it, had already climbed into a corner place) and an 
old lady of a censorious countenance whose two nieces were in the 
class and who was very indignant with Peepy's boots.  Prince 
Turveydrop then tinkled the strings of his kit with his fingers, 
and the young ladies stood up to dance.  Just then there appeared 
from a side-door old Mr. Turveydrop, in the full lustre of his 
deportment.

He was a fat old gentleman with a false complexion, false teeth, 
false whiskers, and a wig.  He had a fur collar, and he had a 
padded breast to his coat, which only wanted a star or a broad blue 
ribbon to be complete.  He was pinched in, and swelled out, and got 
up, and strapped down, as much as he could possibly bear.  He had 
such a neckcloth on (puffing his very eyes out of their natural 
shape), and his chin and even his ears so sunk into it, that it 
seemed as though be must inevitably double up if it were cast 
loose.  He had under his arm a hat of great size and weight, 
shelving downward from the crown to the brim, and in his hand a 
pair of white gloves with which he flapped it as he stood poised on 
one leg in a high-shouldered, round-elbowed state of elegance not 
to be surpassed.  He had a cane, he had an eye-glass, he had a 
snuff-box, he had rings, he had wristbands, he had everything but 
any touch of nature; he was not like youth, he was not like age, he 
was not like anything in the world but a model of deportment.

"Father!  A visitor.  Miss Jellyby's friend, Miss Summerson."

"Distinguished," said Mr. Turveydrop, "by Miss Summerson's 
presence."  As he bowed to me in that tight state, I almost believe 
I saw creases come into the whites of his eyes.

"My father," said the son, aside, to me with quite an affecting 
belief in him, "is a celebrated character.  My father is greatly 
admired."

"Go on, Prince!  Go on!" said Mr. Turveydrop, standing with his 
back to the fire and waving his gloves condescendingly.  "Go on, my 
son!"

At this command, or by this gracious permission, the lesson went 
on.  Prince Turveydrop sometimes played the kit, dancing; sometimes 
played the piano, standing; sometimes hummed the tune with what 
little breath he could spare, while he set a pupil right; always 
conscientiously moved with the least proficient through every step 
and every part of the figure; and never rested for an instant.  His 
distinguished father did nothing whatever but stand before the 
fire, a model of deportment.

"And he never does anything else," said the old lady of the 
censorious countenance.  "Yet would you believe that it's HIS name 
on the door-plate?"

"His son's name is the same, you know," said I.

"He wouldn't let his son have any name if he could take it from 
him," returned the old lady.  "Look at the son's dress!"  It 
certainly was plain--threadbare--almost shabby.  "Yet the father 
must be garnished and tricked out," said the old lady, "because of 
his deportment.  I'd deport him!  Transport him would be better!"

I felt curious to know more concerning this person.  I asked, "Does 
he give lessons in deportment now?"

"Now!" returned the old lady shortly.  "Never did."

After a moment's consideration, I suggested that perhaps fencing 
had been his accomplishment.

"I don't believe he can fence at all, ma'am," said the old lady.

I looked surprised and inquisitive.  The old lady, becoming more 
and more incensed against the master of deportment as she dwelt 
upon the subject, gave me some particulars of his career, with 
strong assurances that they were mildly stated.

He had married a meek little dancing-mistress, with a tolerable 
connexion (having never in his life before done anything but deport 
himself), and had worked her to death, or had, at the best, 
suffered her to work herself to death, to maintain him in those 
expenses which were indispensable to his position.  At once to 
exhibit his deportment to the best models and to keep the best 
models constantly before himself, he had found it necessary to 
frequent all public places of fashionable and lounging resort, to 
be seen at Brighton and elsewhere at fashionable times, and to lead 
an idle life in the very best clothes.  To enable him to do this, 
the affectionate little dancing-mistress had toiled and laboured 
and would have toiled and laboured to that hour if her strength had 
lasted so long.  For the mainspring of the story was that in spite 
of the man's absorbing selfishness, his wife (overpowered by his 
deportment) had, to the last, believed in him and had, on her 
death-bed, in the most moving terms, confided him to their son as 
one who had an inextinguishable claim upon him and whom he could 
never regard with too much pride and deference.  The son, 
inheriting his mother's belief, and having the deportment always 
before him, had lived and grown in the same faith, and now, at 
thirty years of age, worked for his father twelve hours a day and 
looked up to him with veneration on the old imaginary pinnacle.

"The airs the fellow gives himself!" said my informant, shaking her 
head at old Mr. Turveydrop with speechless indignation as he drew 
on his tight gloves, of course unconscious of the homage she was 
rendering.  "He fully believes he is one of the aristocracy!  And 
he is so condescending to the son he so egregiously deludes that 
you might suppose him the most virtuous of parents.  Oh!" said the 
old lady, apostrophizing him with infinite vehemence.  "I could 
bite you!"

I could not help being amused, though I heard the old lady out with 
feelings of real concern.  It was difficult to doubt her with the 
father and son before me.  What I might have thought of them 
without the old lady's account, or what I might have thought of the 
old lady's account without them, I cannot say.  There was a fitness 
of things in the whole that carried conviction with it.

My eyes were yet wandering, from young Mr. Turveydrop working so 
hard, to old Mr. Turveydrop deporting himself so beautifully, when 
the latter came ambling up to me and entered into conversation.

He asked me, first of all, whether I conferred a charm and a 
distinction on London by residing in it?  I did not think it 
necessary to reply that I was perfectly aware I should not do that, 
in any case, but merely told him where I did reside.

"A lady so graceful and accomplished," he said, kissing his right 
glove and afterwards extending it towards the pupils, "will look 
leniently on the deficiencies here.  We do our best to polish--
polish--polish!"

He sat down beside me, taking some pains to sit on the form.  I 
thought, in imitation of the print of his illustrious model on the 
sofa.  And really he did look very like it.

"To polish--polish--polish!" he repeated, taking a pinch of snuff 
and gently fluttering his fingers.  "But we are not, if I may say 
so to one formed to be graceful both by Nature and Art--" with the 
high-shouldered bow, which it seemed impossible for him to make 
without lifting up his eyebrows and shutting his eyes "--we are not 
what we used to be in point of deportment."

"Are we not, sir?" said I.

"We have degenerated," he returned, shaking his head, which he 
could do to a very limited extent in his cravat.  "A levelling age 
is not favourable to deportment.  It develops vulgarity.  Perhaps I 
speak with some little partiality.  It may not be for me to say 
that I have been called, for some years now, Gentleman Turveydrop, 
or that his Royal Highness the Prince Regent did me the honour to 
inquire, on my removing my hat as he drove out of the Pavilion at 
Brighton (that fine building), 'Who is he?  Who the devil is he?  
Why don't I know him?  Why hasn't he thirty thousand a year?'  But 
these are little matters of anecdote--the general property, ma'am--
still repeated occasionally among the upper classes."

"Indeed?" said I.

He replied with the high-shouldered bow.  "Where what is left among 
us of deportment," he added, "still lingers.  England--alas, my 
country!--has degenerated very much, and is degenerating every day.  
She has not many gentlemen left.  We are few.  I see nothing to 
succeed us but a race of weavers."

"One might hope that the race of gentlemen would be perpetuated 
here," said I.

"You are very good."  He smiled with a high-shouldered bow again.  
"You flatter me.  But, no--no!  I have never been able to imbue my 
poor boy with that part of his art.  Heaven forbid that I should 
disparage my dear child, but he has--no deportment."

"He appears to be an excellent master," I observed.

"Understand me, my dear madam, he IS an excellent master.  All that 
can be acquired, he has acquired.  All that can be imparted, he can 
impart.  But there ARE things--"  He took another pinch of snuff 
and made the bow again, as if to add, "This kind of thing, for 
instance."

I glanced towards the centre of the room, where Miss Jellyby's 
lover, now engaged with single pupils, was undergoing greater 
drudgery than ever.

"My amiable child," murmured Mr. Turveydrop, adjusting his cravat.

"Your son is indefatigable," said I.

"It is my reward," said Mr. Turveydrop, "to hear you say so.  In 
some respects, he treads in the footsteps of his sainted mother.  
She was a devoted creature.  But wooman, lovely wooman," said Mr. 
Turveydrop with very disagreeable gallantry, "what a sex you are!"

I rose and joined Miss Jellyby, who was by this time putting on her 
bonnet.  The time allotted to a lesson having fully elapsed, there 
was a general putting on of bonnets.  When Miss Jellyby and the 
unfortunate Prince found an opportunity to become betrothed I don't 
know, but they certainly found none on this occasion to exchange a 
dozen words.

"My dear," said Mr. Turveydrop benignly to his son, "do you know 
the hour?"

"No, father."  The son had no watch.  The father had a handsome 
gold one, which he pulled out with an air that was an example to 
mankind.

"My son," said he, "it's two o'clock.  Recollect your school at 
Kensington at three."

"That's time enough for me, father," said Prince.  "I can take a 
morsel of dinner standing and be off."

"My dear boy," returned his father, "you must be very quick.  You 
will find the cold mutton on the table."

"Thank you, father.  Are YOU off now, father?"

"Yes, my dear.  I suppose," said Mr. Turveydrop, shutting his eyes 
and lifting up his shoulders with modest consciousness, "that I 
must show myself, as usual, about town."

"You had better dine out comfortably somewhere," said his son.

"My dear child, I intend to.  I shall take my little meal, I think, 
at the French house, in the Opera Colonnade."

"That's right.  Good-bye, father!" said Prince, shaking hands.

"Good-bye, my son.  Bless you!"

Mr. Turveydrop said this in quite a pious manner, and it seemed to 
do his son good, who, in parting from him, was so pleased with him, 
so dutiful to him, and so proud of him that I almost felt as if it 
were an unkindness to the younger man not to be able to believe 
implicitly in the elder.  The few moments that were occupied by 
Prince in taking leave of us (and particularly of one of us, as I 
saw, being in the secret), enhanced my favourable impression of his 
almost childish character.  I felt a liking for him and a 
compassion for him as he put his little kit in his pocket--and with 
it his desire to stay a little while with Caddy--and went away 
good-humouredly to his cold mutton and his school at Kensington, 
that made me scarcely less irate with his father than the 
censorious old lady.

The father opened the room door for us and bowed us out in a 
manner, I must acknowledge, worthy of his shining original.  In the 
same style he presently passed us on the other side of the street, 
on his way to the aristocratic part of the town, where he was going 
to show himself among the few other gentlemen left.  For some 
moments, I was so lost in reconsidering what I had heard and seen 
in Newman Street that I was quite unable to talk to Caddy or even 
to fix my attention on what she said to me, especially when I began 
to inquire in my mind whether there were, or ever had been, any 
other gentlemen, not in the dancing profession, who lived and 
founded a reputation entirely on their deportment.  This became so 
bewildering and suggested the possibility of so many Mr. 
Turveydrops that I said, "Esther, you must make up your mind to 
abandon this subject altogether and attend to Caddy."  I 
accordingly did so, and we chatted all the rest of the way to 
Lincoln's Inn.

Caddy told me that her lover's education had been so neglected that 
it was not always easy to read his notes.  She said if he were not 
so anxious about his spelling and took less pains to make it clear, 
he would do better; but he put so many unnecessary letters into 
short words that they sometimes quite lost their English 
appearance.  "He does it with the best intention," observed Caddy, 
"but it hasn't the effect he means, poor fellow!"  Caddy then went 
on to reason, how could he be expected to be a scholar when he had 
passed his whole life in the dancing-school and had done nothing 
but teach and fag, fag and teach, morning, noon, and night!  And 
what did it matter?  She could write letters enough for both, as 
she knew to her cost, and it was far better for him to be amiable 
than learned.  "Besides, it's not as if I was an accomplished girl 
who had any right to give herself airs," said Caddy.  "I know 
little enough, I am sure, thanks to Ma!

"There's another thing I want to tell you, now we are alone," 
continued Caddy, "which I should not have liked to mention unless 
you had seen Prince, Miss Summerson.  You know what a house ours 
is.  It's of no use my trying to learn anything that it would be 
useful for Prince's wife to know in OUR house.  We live in such a 
state of muddle that it's impossible, and I have only been more 
disheartened whenever I have tried.  So I get a little practice 
with--who do you think?  Poor Miss Flite!  Early in the morning I 
help her to tidy her room and clean her birds, and I make her cup 
of coffee for her (of course she taught me), and I have learnt to 
make it so well that Prince says it's the very best coffee he ever 
tasted, and would quite delight old Mr. Turveydrop, who is very 
particular indeed about his coffee.  I can make little puddings 
too; and I know how to buy neck of mutton, and tea, and sugar, and 
butter, and a good many housekeeping things.  I am not clever at my 
needle, yet," said Caddy, glancing at the repairs on Peepy's frock, 
"but perhaps I shall improve, and since I have been engaged to 
Prince and have been doing all this, I have felt better-tempered, I 
hope, and more forgiving to Ma.  It rather put me out at first this 
morning to see you and Miss Clare looking so neat and pretty and to 
feel ashamed of Peepy and myself too, but on the whole I hope I am 
better-tempered than I was and more forgiving to Ma."

The poor girl, trying so hard, said it from her heart, and touched 
mine.  "Caddy, my love," I replied, "I begin to have a great 
affection for you, and I hope we shall become friends."

"Oh, do you?" cried Caddy.  "How happy that would make me!"

"My dear Caddy," said I, "let us be friends from this time, and let 
us often have a chat about these matters and try to find the right 
way through them."  Caddy was overjoyed.  I said everything I could 
in my old-fashioned way to comfort and encourage her, and I would 
not have objected to old Mr. Turveydrop that day for any smaller 
consideration than a settlement on his daughter-in-law.

By this time we were come to Mr. Krook's, whose private door stood 
open.  There was a bill, pasted on the door-post, announcing a room 
to let on the second floor.  It reminded Caddy to tell me as we 
proceeded upstairs that there had been a sudden death there and an 
inquest and that our little friend had been ill of the fright.  The 
door and window of the vacant room being open, we looked in.  It 
was the room with the dark door to which Miss Flite had secretly 
directed my attention when I was last in the house.  A sad and 
desolate place it was, a gloomy, sorrowful place that gave me a 
strange sensation of mournfulness and even dread.  "You look pale," 
said Caddy when we came out, "and cold!"  I felt as if the room had 
chilled me.

We had walked slowly while we were talking, and my guardian and Ada 
were here before us.  We found them in Miss Flite's garret.  They 
were looking at the birds, while a medical gentleman who was so 
good as to attend Miss Flite with much solicitude and compassion 
spoke with her cheerfully by the fire.

"I have finished my professional visit," he said, coming forward.  
"Miss Flite is much better and may appear in court (as her mind is 
set upon it) to-morrow.  She has been greatly missed there, I 
understand."

Miss Flite received the compliment with complacency and dropped a 
general curtsy to us.

"Honoured, indeed," said she, "by another visit from the wards in 
Jarndyce!  Ve-ry happy to receive Jarndyce of Bleak House beneath 
my humble roof!" with a special curtsy.  "Fitz-Jarndyce, my dear"--
she had bestowed that name on Caddy, it appeared, and always called 
her by it--"a double welcome!"

"Has she been very ill?" asked Mr. Jarndyce of the gentleman whom 
we had found in attendance on her.  She answered for herself 
directly, though he had put the question in a whisper.

"Oh, decidedly unwell!  Oh, very unwell indeed," she said 
confidentially.  "Not pain, you know--trouble.  Not bodily so much 
as nervous, nervous!  The truth is," in a subdued voice and 
trembling, "we have had death here.  There was poison in the house.  
I am very susceptible to such horrid things.  It frightened me.  
Only Mr. Woodcourt knows how much.  My physician, Mr, Woodcourt!" 
with great stateliness.  "The wards in Jarndyce--Jarndyce of Bleak 
House--Fitz-Jarndyce!"

"Miss Flite," said Mr. Woodcourt in a grave kind of voice, as if he 
were appealing to her while speaking to us, and laying his hand 
gently on her arm, "Miss Flite describes her illness with her usual 
accuracy.  She was alarmed by an occurrence in the house which 
might have alarmed a stronger person, and was made ill by the 
distress and agitation.  She brought me here in the first hurry of 
the discovery, though too late for me to be of any use to the 
unfortunate man.  I have compensated myself for that disappointment 
by coming here since and being of some small use to her."

"The kindest physician in the college," whispered Miss Flite to me.  
"I expect a judgment.  On the day of judgment.  And shall then 
confer estates."

"She will be as well in a day or two," said Mr. Woodcourt, looking 
at her with an observant smile, "as she ever will be.  In other 
words, quite well of course.  Have you heard of her good fortune?"

"Most extraordinary!" said Miss Flite, smiling brightly.  "You 
never heard of such a thing, my dear!  Every Saturday, Conversation 
Kenge or Guppy (clerk to Conversation K.) places in my hand a paper 
of shillings.  Shillings.  I assure you!  Always the same number in 
the paper.  Always one for every day in the week.  Now you know, 
really!  So well-timed, is it not?  Ye-es!  From whence do these 
papers come, you say?  That is the great question.  Naturally.  
Shall I tell you what I think?  I think," said Miss Flite, drawing 
herself back with a very shrewd look and shaking her right 
forefinger in a most significant manner, "that the Lord Chancellor, 
aware of the length of time during which the Great Seal has been 
open (for it has been open a long time!), forwards them.  Until the 
judgment I expect is given.  Now that's very creditable, you know.  
To confess in that way that he IS a little slow for human life.  So 
delicate!  Attending court the other day--I attend it regularly, 
with my documents--I taxed him with it, and he almost confessed.  
That is, I smiled at him from my bench, and HE smiled at me from 
his bench.  But it's great good fortune, is it not?  And Fitz-
Jarndyce lays the money out for me to great advantage.  Oh, I 
assure you to the greatest advantage!"

I congratulated her (as she addressed herself to me) upon this 
fortunate addition to her income and wished her a long continuance 
of it.  I did not speculate upon the source from which it came or 
wonder whose humanity was so considerate.  My guardian stood before 
me, contemplating the birds, and I had no need to look beyond him.

"And what do you call these little fellows, ma'am?" said he in his 
pleasant voice.  "Have they any names?"

"I can answer for Miss Elite that they have," said I, "for she 
promised to tell us what they were.  Ada remembers?"

Ada remembered very well.

"Did I?" said Miss Elite.  "Who's that at my door?  What are you 
listening at my door for, Krook?"

The old man of the house, pushing it open before him, appeared 
there with his fur cap in his hand and his cat at his heels.

"I warn't listening, Miss Flite," he said, "I was going to give a 
rap with my knuckles, only you're so quick!"

"Make your cat go down.  Drive her away!" the old lady angrily 
exclaimed.

"Bah, bah!  There ain't no danger, gentlefolks," said Mr. Krook, 
looking slowly and sharply from one to another until he had looked 
at all of us; "she'd never offer at the birds when I was here 
unless I told her to it."

"You will excuse my landlord," said the old lady with a dignified 
air.  "M, quite M!  What do you want, Krook, when I have company?"

"Hi!" said the old man.  "You know I am the Chancellor."

"Well?" returned Miss Elite.  "What of that?"

"For the Chancellor," said the old man with a chuckle, "not to be 
acquainted with a Jarndyce is queer, ain't it, Miss Flite?  
Mightn't I take the liberty?  Your servant, sir.  I know Jarndyce 
and Jarndyce a'most as well as you do, sir.  I knowed old Squire 
Tom, sir.  I never to my knowledge see you afore though, not even 
in court.  Yet, I go there a mortal sight of times in the course of 
the year, taking one day with another."

"I never go there," said Mr. Jarndyce (which he never did on any 
consideration).  "I would sooner go--somewhere else."

"Would you though?" returned Krook, grinning.  "You're bearing hard 
upon my noble and learned brother in your meaning, sir, though 
perhaps it is but nat'ral in a Jarndyce.  The burnt child, sir!  
What, you're looking at my lodger's birds, Mr. Jarndyce?"  The old 
man had come by little and little into the room until he now 
touched my guardian with his elbow and looked close up into his 
face with his spectacled eyes.  "It's one of her strange ways that 
she'll never tell the names of these birds if she can help it, 
though she named 'em all."  This was in a whisper.  "Shall I run 
'em over, Flite?" he asked aloud, winking at us and pointing at her 
as she turned away, affecting to sweep the grate.

"If you like," she answered hurriedly.

The old man, looking up at the cages after another look at us, went 
through the list.

"Hope, Joy, Youth, Peace, Rest, Life, Dust, Ashes, Waste, Want, 
Ruin, Despair, Madness, Death, Cunning, Folly, Words, Wigs, Rags, 
Sheepskin, Plunder, Precedent, Jargon, Gammon, and Spinach.  That's 
the whole collection," said the old man, "all cooped up together, 
by my noble and learned brother."

"This is a bitter wind!" muttered my guardian.

"When my noble and learned brother gives his judgment, they're to 
be let go free," said Krook, winking at us again.  "And then," he 
added, whispering and grinning, "if that ever was to happen--which 
it won't--the birds that have never been caged would kill 'em."

"If ever the wind was in the east," said my guardian, pretending to 
look out of the window for a weathercock, "I think it's there to-
day!"

We found it very difficult to get away from the house.  It was not 
Miss Flite who detained us; she was as reasonable a little creature 
in consulting the convenience of others as there possibly could be.  
It was Mr. Krook.  He seemed unable to detach himself from Mr. 
Jarndyce.  If he had been linked to him, he could hardly have 
attended him more closely.  He proposed to show us his Court of 
Chancery and all the strange medley it contained; during the whole 
of our inspection (prolonged by himself) he kept close to Mr. 
Jarndyce and sometimes detained him under one pretence or other 
until we had passed on, as if he were tormented by an inclination 
to enter upon some secret subject which he could not make up his 
mind to approach.  I cannot imagine a countenance and manner more 
singularly expressive of caution and indecision, and a perpetual 
impulse to do something he could not resolve to venture on, than 
Mr. Krook's was that day.  His watchfulness of my guardian was 
incessant.  He rarely removed his eyes from his face.  If he went 
on beside him, he observed him with the slyness of an old white 
fox.  If he went before, he looked back.  When we stood still, he 
got opposite to him, and drawing his hand across and across his 
open mouth with a curious expression of a sense of power, and 
turning up his eyes, and lowering his grey eyebrows until they 
appeared to be shut, seemed to scan every lineament of his face.

At last, having been (always attended by the cat) all over the 
house and having seen the whole stock of miscellaneous lumber, 
which was certainly curious, we came into the back part of the 
shop.  Here on the head of an empty barrel stood on end were an 
ink-bottle, some old stumps of pens, and some dirty playbills; and 
against the wall were pasted several large printed alphabets in 
several plain hands.

"What are you doing here?" asked my guardian.

"Trying to learn myself to read and write," said Krook.

"And how do you get on?"

"Slow.  Bad," returned the old man impatiently.  "It's hard at my 
time of life."

"It would be easier to be taught by some one," said my guardian.

"Aye, but they might teach me wrong!" returned the old man with a 
wonderfully suspicious flash of his eye.  "I don't know what I may 
have lost by not being learned afore.  I wouldn't like to lose 
anything by being learned wrong now."

"Wrong?" said my guardian with his good-humoured smile.  "Who do 
you suppose would teach you wrong?"

"I don't know, Mr. Jarndyce of Bleak House!" replied the old man, 
turning up his spectacles on his forehead and rubbing his hands.  
"I don't suppose as anybody would, but I'd rather trust my own self 
than another!"

These answers and his manner were strange enough to cause my 
guardian to inquire of Mr. Woodcourt, as we all walked across 
Lincoln's Inn together, whether Mr. Krook were really, as his 
lodger represented him, deranged.  The young surgeon replied, no, 
he had seen no reason to think so.  He was exceedingly distrustful, 
as ignorance usually was, and he was always more or less under the 
influence of raw gin, of which he drank great quantities and of 
which he and his back-shop, as we might have observed, smelt 
strongly; but he did not think him mad as yet.

On our way home, I so conciliated Peepy's affections by buying him 
a windmill and two flour-sacks that he would suffer nobody else to 
take off his hat and gloves and would sit nowhere at dinner but at 
my side.  Caddy sat upon the other side of me, next to Ada, to whom 
we imparted the whole history of the engagement as soon as we got 
back.  We made much of Caddy, and Peepy too; and Caddy brightened 
exceedingly; and my guardian was as merry as we were; and we were 
all very happy indeed until Caddy went home at night in a hackney-
coach, with Peepy fast asleep, but holding tight to the windmill.

I have forgotten to mention--at least I have not mentioned--that 
Mr. Woodcourt was the same dark young surgeon whom we had met at 
Mr. Badger's.  Or that Mr. Jarndyce invited him to dinner that day.  
Or that he came.  Or that when they were all gone and I said to 
Ada, "Now, my darling, let us have a little talk about Richard!"  
Ada laughed and said--

But I don't think it matters what my darling said.  She was always 
merry.



CHAPTER XV

Bell Yard


While we were in London Mr. Jarndyce was constantly beset by the 
crowd of excitable ladies and gentlemen whose proceedings had so 
much astonished us.  Mr. Quale, who presented himself soon after 
our arrival, was in all such excitements.  He seemed to project 
those two shining knobs of temples of his into everything that went 
on and to brush his hair farther and farther back, until the very 
roots were almost ready to fly out of his head in inappeasable 
philanthropy.  All objects were alike to him, but he was always 
particularly ready for anything in the way of a testimonial to any 
one.  His great power seemed to be his power of indiscriminate 
admiration.  He would sit for any length of time, with the utmost 
enjoyment, bathing his temples in the light of any order of 
luminary.  Having first seen him perfectly swallowed up in 
admiration of Mrs. Jellyby, I had supposed her to be the absorbing 
object of his devotion.  I soon discovered my mistake and found him 
to be train-bearer and organ-blower to a whole procession of 
people.

Mrs. Pardiggle came one day for a subscription to something, and 
with her, Mr. Quale.  Whatever Mrs. Pardiggle said, Mr. Quale 
repeated to us; and just as he had drawn Mrs. Jellyby out, he drew 
Mrs. Pardiggle out.  Mrs. Pardiggle wrote a letter of introduction 
to my guardian in behalf of her eloquent friend Mr. Gusher.  With 
Mr. Gusher appeared Mr. Quale again.  Mr. Gusher, being a flabby 
gentleman with a moist surface and eyes so much too small for his 
moon of a face that they seemed to have been originally made for 
somebody else, was not at first sight prepossessing; yet he was 
scarcely seated before Mr. Quale asked Ada and me, not inaudibly, 
whether he was not a great creature--which he certainly was, 
flabbily speaking, though Mr. Quale meant in intellectual beauty--
and whether we were not struck by his massive configuration of 
brow.  In short, we heard of a great many missions of various sorts 
among this set of people, but nothing respecting them was half so 
clear to us as that it was Mr. Quale's mission to be in ecstasies 
with everybody else's mission and that it was the most popular 
mission of all.

Mr. Jarndyce had fallen into this company in the tenderness of his 
heart and his earnest desire to do all the good in his power; but 
that he felt it to be too often an unsatisfactory company, where 
benevolence took spasmodic forms, where charity was assumed as a 
regular uniform by loud professors and speculators in cheap 
notoriety, vehement in profession, restless and vain in action, 
servile in the last degree of meanness to the great, adulatory of 
one another, and intolerable to those who were anxious quietly to 
help the weak from failing rather than with a great deal of bluster 
and self-laudation to raise them up a little way when they were 
down, he plainly told us.  When a testimonial was originated to Mr. 
Quale by Mr. Gusher (who had already got one, originated by Mr. 
Quale), and when Mr. Gusher spoke for an hour and a half on the 
subject to a meeting, including two charity schools of small boys 
and girls, who were specially reminded of the widow's mite, and 
requested to come forward with halfpence and be acceptable 
sacrifices, I think the wind was in the east for three whole weeks.

I mention this because I am coming to Mr. Skimpole again.  It 
seemed to me that his off-hand professions of childishness and 
carelessness were a great relief to my guardian, by contrast with 
such things, and were the more readily believed in since to find 
one perfectly undesigning and candid man among many opposites could 
not fail to give him pleasure.  I should be sorry to imply that Mr. 
Skimpole divined this and was politic; I really never understood 
him well enough to know.  What he was to my guardian, he certainly 
was to the rest of the world.

He had not been very well; and thus, though he lived in London, we 
had seen nothing of him until now.  He appeared one morning in his 
usual agreeable way and as full of pleasant spirits as ever.

Well, he said, here he was!  He had been bilious, but rich men were 
often bilious, and therefore he had been persuading himself that he 
was a man of property.  So he was, in a certain point of view--in 
his expansive intentions.  He had been enriching his medical 
attendant in the most lavish manner.  He had always doubled, and 
sometimes quadrupled, his fees.  He had said to the doctor, "Now, 
my dear doctor, it is quite a delusion on your part to suppose that 
you attend me for nothing.  I am overwhelming you with money--in my 
expansive intentions--if you only knew it!"  And really (he said) 
he meant it to that degree that he thought it much the same as 
doing it.  If he had had those bits of metal or thin paper to which 
mankind attached so much importance to put in the doctor's hand, he 
would have put them in the doctor's hand.  Not having them, he 
substituted the will for the deed.  Very well!  If he really meant 
it--if his will were genuine and real, which it was--it appeared to 
him that it was the same as coin, and cancelled the obligation.

"It may be, partly, because I know nothing of the value of money," 
said Mr. Skimpole, "but I often feel this.  It seems so reasonable!  
My butcher says to me he wants that little bill.  It's a part of 
the pleasant unconscious poetry of the man's nature that he always 
calls it a 'little' bill--to make the payment appear easy to both 
of us.  I reply to the butcher, 'My good friend, if you knew it, 
you are paid.  You haven't had the trouble of coming to ask for the 
little bill.  You are paid.  I mean it.'"

"But, suppose," said my guardian, laughing, "he had meant the meat 
in the bill, instead of providing it?"

"My dear Jarndyce," he returned, "you surprise me.  You take the 
butcher's position.  A butcher I once dealt with occupied that very 
ground.  Says he, 'Sir, why did you eat spring lamb at eighteen 
pence a pound?'  'Why did I eat spring lamb at eighteen-pence a 
pound, my honest friend?' said I, naturally amazed by the question.  
'I like spring lamb!'  This was so far convincing.  'Well, sir,' 
says he, 'I wish I had meant the lamb as you mean the money!'  'My 
good fellow,' said I, 'pray let us reason like intellectual beings.  
How could that be?  It was impossible.  You HAD got the lamb, and I 
have NOT got the money.  You couldn't really mean the lamb without 
sending it in, whereas I can, and do, really mean the money without 
paying it!'  He had not a word.  There was an end of the subject."

"Did he take no legal proceedings?" inquired my guardian.

"Yes, he took legal proceedings," said Mr. Skimpole.  "But in that 
he was influenced by passion, not by reason.  Passion reminds me of 
Boythorn.  He writes me that you and the ladies have promised him a 
short visit at his bachelor-house in Lincolnshire."

"He is a great favourite with my girls," said Mr. Jarndyce, "and I 
have promised for them."

"Nature forgot to shade him off, I think," observed Mr. Skimpole to 
Ada and me.  "A little too boisterous--like the sea.  A little too 
vehement--like a bull who has made up his mind to consider every 
colour scarlet.  But I grant a sledge-hammering sort of merit in 
him!"

I should have been surprised if those two could have thought very 
highly of one another, Mr. Boythorn attaching so much importance to 
many things and Mr. Skimpole caring so little for anything.  
Besides which, I had noticed Mr. Boythorn more than once on the 
point of breaking out into some strong opinion when Mr. Skimpole 
was referred to.  Of course I merely joined Ada in saying that we 
had been greatly pleased with him.

"He has invited me," said Mr. Skimpole; "and if a child may trust 
himself in such hands--which the present child is encouraged to do, 
with the united tenderness of two angels to guard him--I shall go.  
He proposes to frank me down and back again.  I suppose it will 
cost money?  Shillings perhaps?  Or pounds?  Or something of that 
sort?  By the by, Coavinses.  You remember our friend Coavinses, 
Miss Summerson?"

He asked me as the subject arose in his mind, in his graceful, 
light-hearted manner and without the least embarrassment.

"Oh, yes!" said I.

"Coavinses has been arrested by the Great Bailiff," said Mr. 
Skimpole.  "He will never do violence to the sunshine any more."

It quite shocked me to hear it, for I had already recalled with 
anything but a serious association the image of the man sitting on 
the sofa that night wiping his head.

"His successor informed me of it yesterday," said Mr. Skimpole.  
"His successor is in my house now--in possession, I think he calls 
it.  He came yesterday, on my blue-eyed daughter's birthday.  I put 
it to him, 'This is unreasonable and inconvenient.  If you had a 
blue-eyed daughter you wouldn't like ME to come, uninvited, on HER 
birthday?'  But he stayed."

Mr. Skimpole laughed at the pleasant absurdity and lightly touched 
the piano by which he was seated.

"And he told me," he said, playing little chords where I shall put 
full stops, "The Coavinses had left.  Three children.  No mother.  
And that Coavinses' profession.  Being unpopular.  The rising 
Coavinses.  Were at a considerable disadvantage."

Mr. Jarndyce got up, rubbing his head, and began to walk about.  
Mr. Skimpole played the melody of one of Ada's favourite songs.  
Ada and I both looked at Mr. Jarndyce, thinking that we knew what 
was passing in his mind.

After walking and stopping, and several times leaving off rubbing 
his head, and beginning again, my guardian put his hand upon the 
keys and stopped Mr. Skimpole's playing.  "I don't like this, 
Skimpole," he said thoughtfully.

Mr. Skimpole, who had quite forgotten the subject, looked up 
surprised.

"The man was necessary," pursued my guardian, walking backward and 
forward in the very short space between the piano and the end of 
the room and rubbing his hair up from the back of his head as if a 
high east wind had blown it into that form.  "If we make such men 
necessary by our faults and follies, or by our want of worldly 
knowledge, or by our misfortunes, we must not revenge ourselves 
upon them.  There was no harm in his trade.  He maintained his 
children.  One would like to know more about this."

"Oh!  Coavinses?" cried Mr. Skimpole, at length perceiving what he 
meant.  "Nothing easier.  A walk to Coavinses' headquarters, and 
you can know what you will."

Mr. Jarndyce nodded to us, who were only waiting for the signal.  
"Come!  We will walk that way, my dears.  Why not that way as soon 
as another!"  We were quickly ready and went out.  Mr. Skimpole 
went with us and quite enjoyed the expedition.  It was so new and 
so refreshing, he said, for him to want Coavinses instead of 
Coavinses wanting him!

He took us, first, to Cursitor Street, Chancery Lane, where there 
was a house with barred windows, which he called Coavinses' Castle.  
On our going into the entry and ringing a bell, a very hideous boy 
came out of a sort of office and looked at us over a spiked wicket.

"Who did you want?" said the boy, fitting two of the spikes into 
his chin.

"There was a follower, or an officer, or something, here," said Mr. 
Jarndyce, "who is dead."

"Yes?" said the boy.  "Well?"

"I want to know his name, if you please?"

"Name of Neckett," said the boy.

"And his address?"

"Bell Yard," said the boy.  "Chandler's shop, left hand side, name 
of Blinder."

"Was he--I don't know how to shape the question--" murmured my 
guardian, "industrious?"

"Was Neckett?" said the boy.  "Yes, wery much so.  He was never 
tired of watching.  He'd set upon a post at a street corner eight 
or ten hours at a stretch if he undertook to do it."

"He might have done worse," I heard my guardian soliloquize.  "He 
might have undertaken to do it and not done it.  Thank you.  That's 
all I want."

We left the boy, with his head on one side and his arms on the 
gate, fondling and sucking the spikes, and went back to Lincoln's 
Inn, where Mr. Skimpole, who had not cared to remain nearer 
Coavinses, awaited us.  Then we all went to Bell Yard, a narrow 
alley at a very short distance.  We soon found the chandler's shop.  
In it was a good-natured-looking old woman with a dropsy, or an 
asthma, or perhaps both.

"Neckett's children?" said she in reply to my inquiry.  "Yes, 
Surely, miss.  Three pair, if you please.  Door right opposite the 
stairs."  And she handed me the key across the counter.

I glanced at the key and glanced at her, but she took it for 
granted that I knew what to do with it.  As it could only be 
intended for the children's door, I came out without askmg any more 
questions and led the way up the dark stairs.  We went as quietly 
as we could, but four of us made some noise on the aged boards, and 
when we came to the second story we found we had disturbed a man 
who was standing there looking out of his room.

"Is it Gridley that's wanted?" he said, fixing his eyes on me with 
an angry stare.

"No, sir," said I; "I am going higher up."

He looked at Ada, and at Mr. Jarndyce, and at Mr. Skimpole, fixing 
the same angry stare on each in succession as they passed and 
followed me.  Mr. Jarndyce gave him good day.  "Good day!" he said 
abruptly and fiercely.  He was a tall, sallow man with a careworn 
head on which but little hair remained, a deeply lined face, and 
prominent eyes.  He had a combative look and a chafing, irritable 
manner which, associated with his figure--still large and powerful, 
though evidently in its decline--rather alarmed me.  He had a pen 
in his hand, and in the glimpse I caught of his room in passing, I 
saw that it was covered with a litter of papers.

Leaving him standing there, we went up to the top room.  I tapped 
at the door, and a little shrill voice inside said, "We are locked 
in.  Mrs. Blinder's got the key!"

I applied the key on hearing this and opened the door.  In a poor 
room with a sloping ceiling and containing very little furniture 
was a mite of a boy, some five or six years old, nursing and 
hushing a heavy child of eighteen months.  There was no fire, 
though the weather was cold; both children were wrapped in some 
poor shawls and tippets as a substitute.  Their clothing was not so 
warm, however, but that their noses looked red and pinched and 
their small figures shrunken as the boy walked up and down nursing 
and hushing the child with its head on his shoulder.

"Who has locked you up here alone?" we naturally asked.

"Charley," said the boy, standing still to gaze at us.

"Is Charley your brother?"

"No.  She's my sister, Charlotte.  Father called her Charley."

"Are there any more of you besides Charley?"

"Me," said the boy, "and Emma," patting the limp bonnet of the 
child he was nursing.  "And Charley."

"Where is Charley now?"

"Out a-washing," said the boy, beginning to walk up and down again 
and taking the nankeen bonnet much too near the bedstead by trying 
to gaze at us at the same time.

We were looking at one another and at these two children when there 
came into the room a very little girl, childish in figure but 
shrewd and older-looking in the face--pretty-faced too--wearing a 
womanly sort of bonnet much too large for her and drying her bare 
arms on a womanly sort of apron.  Her fingers were white and 
wrinkled with washing, and the soap-suds were yet smoking which she 
wiped off her arms.  But for this, she might have been a child 
playing at washing and imitating a poor working-woman with a quick 
observation of the truth.

She had come running from some place in the neighbourhood and had 
made all the haste she could.  Consequently, though she was very 
light, she was out of breath and could not speak at first, as she 
stood panting, and wiping her arms, and looking quietly at us.

"Oh, here's Charley!" said the boy.

The child he was nursing stretched forth its arms and cried out to 
be taken by Charley.  The little girl took it, in a womanly sort of 
manner belonging to the apron and the bonnet, and stood looking at 
us over the burden that clung to her most affectionately.

"Is it possible," whispered my guardian as we put a chair for the 
little creature and got her to sit down with her load, the boy 
keeping close to her, holding to her apron, "that this child works 
for the rest?  Look at this!  For God's sake, look at this!"

It was a thing to look at.  The three children close together, and 
two of them relying solely on the third, and the third so young and 
yet with an air of age and steadiness that sat so strangely on the 
childish figure.

"Charley, Charley!" said my guardian.  "How old are you?"

"Over thirteen, sir," replied the child.

"Oh! What a great age," said my guardian.  "What a great age, 
Charley!"

I cannot describe the tenderness with which he spoke to her, half 
playfully yet all the more compassionately and mournfully.

"And do you live alone here with these babies, Charley?" said my 
guardian.

"Yes, sir," returned the child, looking up into his face with 
perfect confidence, "since father died."

"And how do you live, Charley?  Oh! Charley," said my guardian, 
turning his face away for a moment, "how do you live?"

"Since father died, sir, I've gone out to work.  I'm out washing 
to-day."

"God help you, Charley!" said my guardian.  "You're not tall enough 
to reach the tub!"

"In pattens I am, sir," she said quickly.  "I've got a high pair as 
belonged to mother."

"And when did mother die?  Poor mother!"

"Mother died just after Emma was born," said the child, glancing at 
the face upon her bosom.  "Then father said I was to be as good a 
mother to her as I could.  And so I tried.  And so I worked at home 
and did cleaning and nursing and washing for a long time before I 
began to go out.  And that's how I know how; don't you see, sir?"

"And do you often go out?"

"As often as I can," said Charley, opening her eyes and smiling, 
"because of earning sixpences and shillings!"

"And do you always lock the babies up when you go out?"

'To keep 'em safe, sir, don't you see?" said Charley.  "Mrs. 
Blinder comes up now and then, and Mr. Gridley comes up sometimes, 
and perhaps I can run in sometimes, and they can play you know, and 
Tom an't afraid of being locked up, are you, Tom?"

'"No-o!" said Tom stoutly.

"When it comes on dark, the lamps are lighted down in the court, 
and they show up here quite bright--almost quite bright.  Don't 
they, Tom?"

"Yes, Charley," said Tom, "almost quite bright."

"Then he's as good as gold," said the little creature--Oh, in such 
a motherly, womanly way!  "And when Emma's tired, he puts her to 
bed.  And when he's tired he goes to bed himself.  And when I come 
home and light the candle and has a bit of supper, he sits up again 
and has it with me.  Don't you, Tom?"

"Oh, yes, Charley!" said Tom.  "That I do!"  And either in this 
glimpse of the great pleasure of his life or in gratitude and love 
for Charley, who was all in all to him, he laid his face among the 
scanty folds of her frock and passed from laughing into crying.

It was the first time since our entry that a tear had been shed 
among these children.  The little orphan girl had spoken of their 
father and their mother as if all that sorrow were subdued by the 
necessity of taking courage, and by her childish importance in 
being able to work, and by her bustling busy way.  But now, when 
Tom cried, although she sat quite tranquil, looking quietly at us, 
and did not by any movement disturb a hair of the head of either of 
her little charges, I saw two silent tears fall down her face.

I stood at the window with Ada, pretending to look at the 
housetops, and the blackened stack of chimneys, and the poor 
plants, and the birds in little cages belonging to the neighbours, 
when I found that Mrs. Blinder, from the shop below, had come in 
(perhaps it had taken her all this time to get upstairs) and was 
talking to my guardian.

"It's not much to forgive 'em the rent, sir," she said; "who could 
take it from them!"

'"Well, well!" said my guardian to us two.  "It is enough that the 
time will come when this good woman will find that it WAS much, and 
that forasmuch as she did it unto the least of these--This child," 
he added after a few moments, "could she possibly continue this?"

"Really, sir, I think she might," said Mrs. Blinder, getting her 
heavy breath by painful degrees.  "She's as handy as it's possible 
to be.  Bless you, sir, the way she tended them two children after 
the mother died was the talk of the yard!  And it was a wonder to 
see her with him after he was took ill, it really was!  'Mrs. 
Blinder,' he said to me the very last he spoke--he was lying there
--'Mrs. Blinder, whatever my calling may have been, I see a angel 
sitting in this room last night along with my child, and I trust 
her to Our Father!'"

"He had no other calling?" said my guardian.

"No, sir," returned Mrs. Blinder, "he was nothing but a follerers.  
When he first came to lodge here, I didn't know what he was, and I 
confess that when I found out I gave him notice.  It wasn't liked 
in the yard.  It wasn't approved by the other lodgers.  It is NOT a 
genteel calling," said Mrs. Blinder, "and most people do object to 
it.  Mr. Gridley objected to it very strong, and he is a good 
lodger, though his temper has been hard tried."

"So you gave him notice?" said my guardian.

"So I gave him notice," said Mrs. Blinder.  "But really when the 
time came, and I knew no other ill of him, I was in doubts.  He was 
punctual and diligent; he did what he had to do, sir," said Mrs. 
Blinder, unconsciously fixing Mr. Skimpole with her eye, "and it's 
something in this world even to do that."

"So you kept him after all?"

"Why, I said that if he could arrange with Mr. Gridley, I could 
arrange it with the other lodgers and should not so much mind its 
being liked or disliked in the yard.  Mr. Gridley gave his consent 
gruff--but gave it.  He was always gruff with him, but he has been 
kind to the children since.  A person is never known till a person 
is proved."

"Have many people been kind to the children?" asked Mr. Jarndyce.

"Upon the whole, not so bad, sir," said Mrs. Blinder; "but 
certainly not so many as would have been if their father's calling 
had been different.  Mr. Coavins gave a guinea, and the follerers 
made up a little purse.  Some neighbours in the yard that had 
always joked and tapped their shoulders when he went by came 
forward with a little subscription, and--in general--not so bad.  
Similarly with Charlotte.  Some people won't employ her because she 
was a follerer's child; some people that do employ her cast it at 
her; some make a merit of having her to work for them, with that 
and all her draw-backs upon her, and perhaps pay her less and put 
upon her more.  But she's patienter than others would be, and is 
clever too, and always willing, up to the full mark of her strength 
and over.  So I should say, in general, not so bad, sir, but might 
be better."

Mrs. Blinder sat down to give herself a more favourable opportunity 
of recovering her breath, exhausted anew by so much talking before 
it was fully restored.  Mr. Jarndyce was turning to speak to us 
when his attention was attracted by the abrupt entrance into the 
room of the Mr. Gridley who had been mentioned and whom we had seen 
on our way up.

"I don't know what you may be doing here, ladies and gentlemen," he 
said, as if he resented our presence, "but you'll excuse my coming 
in.  I don't come in to stare about me.  Well, Charley!  Well, Tom!  
Well, little one!  How is it with us all to-day?"

He bent over the group in a caressing way and clearly was regarded 
as a friend by the children, though his face retained its stern 
character and his manner to us was as rude as it could be.  My 
guardian noticed it and respected it.

"No one, surely, would come here to stare about him," he said 
mildly.

"May be so, sir, may be so," returned the other, taking Tom upon 
his knee and waving him off impatiently.  "I don't want to argue 
with ladies and gentlemen.  I have had enough of arguing to last 
one man his life."

"You have sufficient reason, I dare say," said Mr. Jarndyce, "for 
being chafed and irritated--"

"There again!" exclaimed the man, becoming violently angry.  "I am 
of a quarrelsome temper.  I am irascible.  I am not polite!"

"Not very, I think."

"Sir," said Gridley, putting down the child and going up to him as 
if he meant to strike him, "do you know anything of Courts of 
Equity?"

"Perhaps I do, to my sorrow."

"To your sorrow?" said the man, pausing in his wrath.  "if so, I 
beg your pardon.  I am not polite, I know.  I beg your pardon!  
Sir," with renewed violence, "I have been dragged for five and 
twenty years over burning iron, and I have lost the habit of 
treading upon velvet.  Go into the Court of Chancery yonder and ask 
what is one of the standing jokes that brighten up their business 
sometimes, and they will tell you that the best joke they have is 
the man from Shropshire.  I," he said, beating one hand on the 
other passionately, "am the man from Shropshire."

"I believe I and my family have also had the honour of furnishing 
some entertainment in the same grave place," said my guardian 
composedly.  "You may have heard my name--Jarndyce."

"Mr. Jarndyce," said Gridley with a rough sort of salutation, "you 
bear your wrongs more quietly than I can bear mine.  More than 
that, I tell you--and I tell this gentleman, and these young 
ladies, if they are friends of yours--that if I took my wrongs in 
any other way, I should be driven mad!  It is only by resenting 
them, and by revenging them in my mind, and by angrily demanding 
the justice I never get, that I am able to keep my wits together.  
It is only that!" he said, speaking in a homely, rustic way and 
with great vehemence.  "You may tell me that I over-excite myself.  
I answer that it's in my nature to do it, under wrong, and I must 
do it.  There's nothing between doing it, and sinking into the 
smiling state of the poor little mad woman that haunts the court.  
If I was once to sit down under it, I should become imbecile."

The passion and heat in which he was, and the manner in which his 
face worked, and the violent gestures with which he accompanied 
what he said, were most painful to see.

"Mr. Jarndyce," he said, "consider my case.  As true as there is a 
heaven above us, this is my case.  I am one of two brothers.  My 
father (a farmer) made a will and left his farm and stock and so 
forth to my mother for her life.  After my mother's death, all was 
to come to me except a legacy of three hundred pounds that I was 
then to pay my brother.  My mother died.  My brother some time 
afterwards claimed his legacy.  I and some of my relations said 
that he had had a part of it already in board and lodging and some 
other things.  Now mind!  That was the question, and nothing else.  
No one disputed the will; no one disputed anything but whether part 
of that three hundred pounds had been already paid or not.  To 
settle that question, my brother filing a bill, I was obliged to go 
into this accursed Chancery; I was forced there because the law 
forced me and would let me go nowhere else.  Seventeen people were 
made defendants to that simple suit!  It first came on after two 
years.  It was then stopped for another two years while the master 
(may his head rot off!) inquired whether I was my father's son, 
about which there was no dispute at all with any mortal creature.  
He then found out that there were not defendants enough--remember, 
there were only seventeen as yet!--but that we must have another 
who had been left out and must begin all over again.  The costs at 
that time--before the thing was begun!--were three times the 
legacy.  My brother would have given up the legacy, and joyful, to 
escape more costs.  My whole estate, left to me in that will of my 
father's, has gone in costs.  The suit, still undecided, has fallen 
into rack, and ruin, and despair, with everything else--and here I 
stand, this day!  Now, Mr. Jarndyce, in your suit there are 
thousands and thousands involved, where in mine there are hundreds.  
Is mine less hard to bear or is it harder to bear, when my whole 
living was in it and has been thus shamefully sucked away?"

Mr. Jarndyce said that he condoled with him with all his heart and 
that he set up no monopoly himself in being unjustly treated by 
this monstrous system.

"There again!" said Mr. Gridley with no diminution of his rage.  
"The system!  I am told on all hands, it's the system.  I mustn't 
look to individuals.  It's the system.  I mustn't go into court and 
say, 'My Lord, I beg to know this from you--is this right or wrong?  
Have you the face to tell me I have received justice and therefore 
am dismissed?'  My Lord knows nothing of it.  He sits there to 
administer the system.  I mustn't go to Mr. Tulkinghorn, the 
solicitor in Lincoln's Inn Fields, and say to him when he makes me 
furious by being so cool and satisfied--as they all do, for I know 
they gain by it while I lose, don't I?--I mustn't say to him, 'I 
will have something out of some one for my ruin, by fair means or 
foul!'  HE is not responsible.  It's the system.  But, if I do no 
violence to any of them, here--I may!  I don't know what may happen 
if I am carried beyond myself at last!  I will accuse the 
individual workers of that system against me, face to face, before 
the great eternal bar!"

His passion was fearful.  I could not have believed in such rage 
without seeing it.

"I have done!" he said, sitting down and wiping his face.  "Mr. 
Jarndyce, I have done!  I am violent, I know.  I ought to know it.  
I have been in prison for contempt of court.  I have been in prison 
for threatening the solicitor.  I have been in this trouble, and 
that trouble, and shall be again.  I am the man from Shropshire, 
and I sometimes go beyond amusing them, though they have found it 
amusing, too, to see me committed into custody and brought up in 
custody and all that.  It would be better for me, they tell me, if 
I restrained myself.  I tell them that if I did restrain myself I 
should become imbecile.  I was a good-enough-tempered man once, I 
believe.  People in my part of the country say they remember me so, 
but now I must have this vent under my sense of injury or nothing 
could hold my wits together.  It would be far better for you, Mr. 
Gridley,' the Lord Chancellor told me last week, 'not to waste your 
time here, and to stay, usefully employed, down in Shropshire.'  
'My Lord, my Lord, I know it would,' said I to him, 'and it would 
have been far better for me never to have heard the name of your 
high office, but unhappily for me, I can't undo the past, and the 
past drives me here!'  Besides," he added, breaking fiercely out, 
"I'll shame them.  To the last, I'll show myself in that court to 
its shame.  If I knew when I was going to die, and could be carried 
there, and had a voice to speak with, I would die there, saying, 
'You have brought me here and sent me from here many and many a 
time.  Now send me out feet foremost!'"

His countenance had, perhaps for years, become so set in its 
contentious expression that it did not soften, even now when he was 
quiet.

"I came to take these babies down to my room for an hour," he said, 
going to them again, "and let them play about.  I didn't mean to 
say all this, but it don't much signify.  You're not afraid of me, 
Tom, are you?"

"No!" said Tom.  "You ain't angry with ME."

"You are right, my child.  You're going back, Charley?  Aye?  Come 
then, little one!"  He took the youngest child on his arm, where 
she was willing enough to be carried.  "I shouldn't wonder if we 
found a ginger-bread soldier downstairs.  Let's go and look for 
him!"

He made his former rough salutation, which was not deficient in a 
certain respect, to Mr. Jarndyce, and bowing slightly to us, went 
downstairs to his room.

Upon that, Mr. Skimpole began to talk, for the first time since our 
arrival, in his usual gay strain.  He said, Well, it was really 
very pleasant to see how things lazily adapted themselves to 
purposes.  Here was this Mr. Gridley, a man of a robust will and 
surprising energy--intellectually speaking, a sort of inharmonious 
blacksmith--and he could easily imagine that there Gridley was, 
years ago, wandering about in life for something to expend his 
superfluous combativeness upon--a sort of Young Love among the 
thorns--when the Court of Chancery came in his way and accommodated 
him with the exact thing he wanted.  There they were, matched, ever 
afterwards!  Otherwise he might have been a great general, blowing 
up all sorts of towns, or he might have been a great politician, 
dealing in all sorts of parliamentary rhetoric; but as it was, he 
and the Court of Chancery had fallen upon each other in the 
pleasantest way, and nobody was much the worse, and Gridley was, so 
to speak, from that hour provided for.  Then look at Coavinses!  
How delightfully poor Coavinses (father of these charming children) 
illustrated the same principle!  He, Mr. Skimpole, himself, had 
sometimes repined at the existence of Coavinses.  He had found 
Coavinses in his way.  He could had dispensed with Coavinses.  
There had been times when, if he had been a sultan, and his grand 
vizier had said one morning, "What does the Commander of the 
Faithful require at the hands of his slave?" he might have even 
gone so far as to reply, "The head of Coavinses!"  But what turned 
out to be the case?  That, all that time, he had been giving 
employment to a most deserving man, that he had been a benefactor 
to Coavinses, that he had actually been enabling Coavinses to bring 
up these charming children in this agreeable way, developing these 
social virtues!  Insomuch that his heart had just now swelled and 
the tears had come into his eyes when he had looked round the room 
and thought, "I was the great patron of Coavinses, and his little 
comforts were MY work!"

There was something so captivating in his light way of touching 
these fantastic strings, and he was such a mirthful child by the 
side of the graver childhood we had seen, that he made my guardian 
smile even as he turned towards us from a little private talk with 
Mrs. Blinder.  We kissed Charley, and took her downstairs with us, 
and stopped outside the house to see her run away to her work.  I 
don't know where she was going, but we saw her run, such a little, 
little creature in her womanly bonnet and apron, through a covered 
way at the bottom of the court and melt into the city's strife and 
sound like a dewdrop in an ocean.



CHAPTER XVI

Tom-all-Alone's


My Lady Dedlock is restless, very restless.  The astonished 
fashionable intelligence hardly knows where to have her.  To-day 
she is at Chesney Wold; yesterday she was at her house in town; to-
morrow she may be abroad, for anything the fashionable intelligence 
can with confidence predict.  Even Sir Leicester's gallantry has 
some trouble to keep pace with her.  It would have more but that 
his other faithful ally, for better and for worse--the gout--darts 
into the old oak bedchamber at Chesney Wold and grips him by both 
legs.

Sir Leicester receives the gout as a troublesome demon, but still a 
demon of the patrician order.  All the Dedlocks, in the direct male 
line, through a course of time during and beyond which the memory 
of man goeth not to the contrary, have had the gout.  It can be 
proved, sir.  Other men's fathers may have died of the rheumatism 
or may have taken base contagion from the tainted blood of the sick 
vulgar, but the Dedlock family have communicated something 
exclusive even to the levelling process of dying by dying of their 
own family gout.  It has come down through the illustrious line 
like the plate, or the pictures, or the place in Lincolnshire.  It 
is among their dignities.  Sir Leicester is perhaps not wholly 
without an impression, though he has never resolved it into words, 
that the angel of death in the discharge of his necessary duties 
may observe to the shades of the aristocracy, "My lords and 
gentlemen, I have the honour to present to you another Dedlock 
certified to have arrived per the family gout."

Hence Sir Leicester yields up his family legs to the family 
disorder as if he held his name and fortune on that feudal tenure.  
He feels that for a Dedlock to be laid upon his back and 
spasmodically twitched and stabbed in his extremities is a liberty 
taken somewhere, but he thinks, "We have all yielded to this; it 
belongs to us; it has for some hundreds of years been understood 
that we are not to make the vaults in the park interesting on more 
ignoble terms; and I submit myself to the compromise.

And a goodly show he makes, lying in a flush of crimson and gold in 
the midst of the great drawing-room before his favourite picture of 
my Lady, with broad strips of sunlight shining in, down the long 
perspective, through the long line of windows, and alternating with 
soft reliefs of shadow.  Outside, the stately oaks, rooted for ages 
in the green ground which has never known ploughshare, but was 
still a chase when kings rode to battle with sword and shield and 
rode a-hunting with bow and arrow, bear witness to his greatness.  
Inside, his forefathers, looking on him from the walls, say, "Each 
of us was a passing reality here and left this coloured shadow of 
himself and melted into remembrance as dreamy as the distant voices 
of the rooks now lulling you to rest," and hear their testimony to 
his greatness too.  And he is very great this day.  And woe to 
Boythorn or other daring wight who shall presumptuously contest an 
inch with him!

My Lady is at present represented, near Sir Leicester, by her 
portrait.  She has flitted away to town, with no intention of 
remaining there, and will soon flit hither again, to the confusion 
of the fashionable intelligence.  The house in town is not prepared 
for her reception.  It is muffled and dreary.  Only one Mercury in 
powder gapes disconsolate at the hall-window; and he mentioned last 
night to another Mercury of his acquaintance, also accustomed to 
good society, that if that sort of thing was to last--which it 
couldn't, for a man of his spirits couldn't bear it, and a man of 
his figure couldn't be expected to bear it--there would be no 
resource for him, upon his honour, but to cut his throat!

What connexion can there be between the place in Lincolnshire, the 
house in town, the Mercury in powder, and the whereabout of Jo the 
outlaw with the broom, who had that distant ray of light upon him 
when he swept the churchyard-step?  What connexion can there have 
been between many people in the innumerable histories of this world 
who from opposite sides of great gulfs have, nevertheless, been 
very curiously brought together!

Jo sweeps his crossing all day long, unconscious of the link, if 
any link there be.  He sums up his mental condition when asked a 
question by replying that he "don't know nothink."  He knows that 
it's hard to keep the mud off the crossing in dirty weather, and 
harder still to live by doing it.  Nobody taught him even that 
much; he found it out.

Jo lives--that is to say, Jo has not yet died--in a ruinous place 
known to the like of him by the name of Tom-all-Alone's.  It is a 
black, dilapidated street, avoided by all decent people, where the 
crazy houses were seized upon, when their decay was far advanced, 
by some bold vagrants who after establishing their own possession 
took to letting them out in lodgings.  Now, these tumbling 
tenements contain, by night, a swarm of misery.  As on the ruined 
human wretch vermin parasites appear, so these ruined shelters have 
bred a crowd of foul existence that crawls in and out of gaps in 
walls and boards; and coils itself to sleep, in maggot numbers, 
where the rain drips in; and comes and goes, fetching and carrying 
fever and sowing more evil in its every footprint than Lord Coodle, 
and Sir Thomas Doodle, and the Duke of Foodle, and all the fine 
gentlemen in office, down to Zoodle, shall set right in five 
hundred years--though born expressly to do it.

Twice lately there has been a crash and a cloud of dust, like the 
springing of a mine, in Tom-all-Alone's; and each time a house has 
fallen.  These accidents have made a paragraph in the newspapers 
and have filled a bed or two in the nearest hospital.  The gaps 
remain, and there are not unpopular lodgings among the rubbish.  As 
several more houses are nearly ready to go, the next crash in Tom-
all-Alone's may be expected to be a good one.

This desirable property is in Chancery, of course.  It would be an 
insult to the discernment of any man with half an eye to tell him 
so.  Whether "Tom" is the popular representative of the original 
plaintiff or defendant in Jarndyce and Jarndyce, or whether Tom 
lived here when the suit had laid the street waste, all alone, 
until other settlers came to join him, or whether the traditional 
title is a comprehensive name for a retreat cut off from honest 
company and put out of the pale of hope, perhaps nobody knows.  
Certainly Jo don't know.

"For I don't," says Jo, "I don't know nothink."

It must be a strange state to be like Jo!  To shuffle through the 
streets, unfamiliar with the shapes, and in utter darkness as to 
the meaning, of those mysterious symbols, so abundant over the 
shops, and at the corners of streets, and on the doors, and in the 
windows!  To see people read, and to see people write, and to see 
the postmen deliver letters, and not to have the least idea of all 
that language--to be, to every scrap of it, stone blind and dumb!  
It must be very puzzling to see the good company going to the 
churches on Sundays, with their books in their hands, and to think 
(for perhaps Jo DOES think at odd times) what does it all mean, and 
if it means anything to anybody, how comes it that it means nothing 
to me?  To be hustled, and jostled, and moved on; and really to 
feel that it would appear to be perfectly true that I have no 
business here, or there, or anywhere; and yet to be perplexed by 
the consideration that I AM here somehow, too, and everybody 
overlooked me until I became the creature that I am!  It must be a 
strange state, not merely to be told that I am scarcely human (as 
in the case of my offering myself for a witness), but to feel it of 
my own knowledge all my life!  To see the horses, dogs, and cattle 
go by me and to know that in ignorance I belong to them and not to 
the superior beings in my shape, whose delicacy I offend!  Jo's 
ideas of a criminal trial, or a judge, or a bishop, or a govemment, 
or that inestimable jewel to him (if he only knew it) the 
Constitution, should be strange!  His whole material and immaterial 
life is wonderfully strange; his death, the strangest thing of all.

Jo comes out of Tom-all-Alone's, meeting the tardy morning which is 
always late in getting down there, and munches his dirty bit of 
bread as he comes along.  His way lying through many streets, and 
the houses not yet being open, he sits down to breakfast on the 
door-step of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in 
Foreign Parts and gives it a brush when he has finished as an 
acknowledgment of the accommodation.  He admires the size of the 
edifice and wonders what it's all about.  He has no idea, poor 
wretch, of the spiritual destitution of a coral reef in the Pacific 
or what it costs to look up the precious souls among the coco-nuts 
and bread-fruit.

He goes to his crossing and begins to lay it out for the day.  The 
town awakes; the great tee-totum is set up for its daily spin and 
whirl; all that unaccountable reading and writing, which has been 
suspended for a few hours, recommences.  Jo and the other lower 
animals get on in the unintelligible mess as they can.  It is 
market-day.  The blinded oxen, over-goaded, over-driven, never 
guided, run into wrong places and are beaten out, and plunge red-
eyed and foaming at stone walls, and often sorely hurt the 
innocent, and often sorely hurt themselves.  Very like Jo and his 
order; very, very like!

A band of music comes and plays.  Jo listens to it.  So does a dog
--a drover's dog, waiting for his master outside a butcher's shop, 
and evidently thinking about those sheep he has had upon his mind 
for some hours and is happily rid of.  He seems perplexed 
respecting three or four, can't remember where he left them, looks 
up and down the street as half expecting to see them astray, 
suddenly pricks up his ears and remembers all about it.  A 
thoroughly vagabond dog, accustomed to low company and public-
houses; a terrific dog to sheep, ready at a whistle to scamper over 
their backs and tear out mouthfuls of their wool; but an educated, 
improved, developed dog who has been taught his duties and knows 
how to discharge them.  He and Jo listen to the music, probably 
with much the same amount of animal satisfaction; likewise as to 
awakened association, aspiration, or regret, melancholy or joyful 
reference to things beyond the senses, they are probably upon a 
par.  But, otherwise, how far above the human listener is the 
brute!

Turn that dog's descendants wild, like Jo, and in a very few years 
they will so degenerate that they will lose even their bark--but 
not their bite.

The day changes as it wears itself away and becomes dark and 
drizzly.  Jo fights it out at his crossing among the mud and 
wheels, the horses, whips, and umbrellas, and gets but a scanty sum 
to pay for the unsavoury shelter of Tom-all-Alone's.  Twilight 
comes on; gas begins to start up in the shops; the lamplighter, 
with his ladder, runs along the margin of the pavement.  A wretched 
evening is beginning to close in.

In his chambers Mr. Tulkinghorn sits meditating an application to 
the nearest magistrate to-morrow morning for a warrant.  Gridley, a 
disappointed suitor, has been here to-day and has been alarming.  
We are not to be put in bodily fear, and that ill-conditioned 
fellow shall be held to bail again.  From the ceiling, 
foreshortened Allegory, in the person of one impossible Roman 
upside down, points with the arm of Samson (out of joint, and an 
odd one) obtrusively toward the window.  Why should Mr. 
Tulkinghorn, for such no reason, look out of window?  Is the hand 
not always pointing there?  So he does not look out of window.

And if he did, what would it be to see a woman going by?  There are 
women enough in the world, Mr. Tulkinghorn thinks--too many; they 
are at the bottom of all that goes wrong in it, though, for the 
matter of that, they create business for lawyers.  What would it be 
to see a woman going by, even though she were going secretly?  They 
are all secret.  Mr. Tulkinghorn knows that very well.

But they are not all like the woman who now leaves him and his 
house behind, between whose plain dress and her refined manner 
there is something exceedingly inconsistent.  She should be an 
upper servant by her attire, yet in her air and step, though both 
are hurried and assumed--as far as she can assume in the muddy 
streets, which she treads with an unaccustomed foot--she is a lady.  
Her face is veiled, and still she sufficiently betrays herself to 
make more than one of those who pass her look round sharply.

She never turns her head.  Lady or servant, she has a purpose in 
her and can follow it.  She never turns her head until she comes to 
the crossing where Jo plies with his broom.  He crosses with her 
and begs.  Still, she does not turn her head until she has landed 
on the other side.  Then she slightly beckons to him and says, 
"Come here!"

Jo follows her a pace or two into a quiet court.

"Are you the boy I've read of in the papers?" she asked behind her 
veil.

"I don't know," says Jo, staring moodily at the veil, "nothink 
about no papers.  I don't know nothink about nothink at all."

"Were you examined at an inquest?"

"I don't know nothink about no--where I was took by the beadle, do 
you mean?" says Jo.  "Was the boy's name at the inkwhich Jo?"

"Yes."

"That's me!" says Jo.

"Come farther up."

"You mean about the man?" says Jo, following.  "Him as wos dead?"

"Hush!  Speak in a whisper!  Yes.  Did he look, when he was living, 
so very ill and poor?"

"Oh, jist!" says Jo.

"Did he look like--not like YOU?" says the woman with abhorrence.

"Oh, not so bad as me," says Jo.  "I'm a reg'lar one I am!  You 
didn't know him, did you?"

"How dare you ask me if I knew him?"

"No offence, my lady," says Jo with much humility, for even he has 
got at the suspicion of her being a lady.

"I am not a lady.  I am a servant."

"You are a jolly servant!" says Jo without the least idea of saying 
anything offensive, merely as a tribute of admiration.

"Listen and be silent.  Don't talk to me, and stand farther from 
me!  Can you show me all those places that were spoken of in the 
account I read?  The place he wrote for, the place he died at, the 
place where you were taken to, and the place where he was buried?  
Do you know the place where he was buried?"

Jo answers with a nod, having also nodded as each other place was 
mentioned.

"Go before me and show me all those dreadful places.  Stop opposite 
to each, and don't speak to me unless I speak to you.  Don't look 
back.  Do what I want, and I will pay you well."

Jo attends closely while the words are being spoken; tells them off 
on his broom-handle, finding them rather hard; pauses to consider 
their meaning; considers it satisfactory; and nods his ragged head.

"I'm fly," says Jo.  "But fen larks, you know.  Stow hooking it!"

"What does the horrible creature mean?" exclaims the servant, 
recoiling from him.

"Stow cutting away, you know!" says Jo.

"I don't understand you.  Go on before!  I will give you more money 
than you ever had in your life."

Jo screws up his mouth into a whistle, gives his ragged head a rub, 
takes his broom under his arm, and leads the way, passing deftly 
with his bare feet over the hard stones and through the mud and 
mire.

Cook's Court.  Jo stops.  A pause.

"Who lives here?"

"Him wot give him his writing and give me half a bull," says Jo in 
a whisper without looking over his shoulder.

"Go on to the next."

Krook's house.  Jo stops again.  A longer pause.

"Who lives here?"

"HE lived here," Jo answers as before.

After a silence he is asked, "In which room?"

"In the back room up there.  You can see the winder from this 
corner.  Up there!  That's where I see him stritched out.  This is 
the public-ouse where I was took to."

"Go on to the next!"

It is a longer walk to the next, but Jo, relieved of his first 
suspicions, sticks to the forms imposed upon him and does not look 
round.  By many devious ways, reeking with offence of many kinds, 
they come to the little tunnel of a court, and to the gas-lamp 
(lighted now), and to the iron gate.

"He was put there," says Jo, holding to the bars and looking in.

"Where?  Oh, what a scene of horror!"

"There!" says Jo, pointing.  "Over yinder.  Arnong them piles of 
bones, and close to that there kitchin winder!  They put him wery 
nigh the top.  They was obliged to stamp upon it to git it in.  I 
could unkiver it for you with my broom if the gate was open.  
That's why they locks it, I s'pose," giving it a shake.  "It's 
always locked.  Look at the rat!" cries Jo, excited.  "Hi!  Look!  
There he goes!  Ho!  Into the ground!"

The servant shrinks into a corner, into a corner of that hideous 
archway, with its deadly stains contaminating her dress; and 
putting out her two hands and passionately telling him to keep away 
from her, for he is loathsome to her, so remains for some moments.  
Jo stands staring and is still staring when she recovers herself.

"Is this place of abomination consecrated ground?"

"I don't know nothink of consequential ground," says Jo, still 
staring.

"Is it blessed?"

"Which?" says Jo, in the last degree amazed.

"Is it blessed?"

"I'm blest if I know," says Jo, staring more than ever; "but I 
shouldn't think it warn't.  Blest?" repeats Jo, something troubled 
in his mind.  "It an't done it much good if it is.  Blest?  I 
should think it was t'othered myself.  But I don't know nothink!"

The servant takes as little heed of what he says as she seems to 
take of what she has said herself.  She draws off her glove to get 
some money from her purse.  Jo silently notices how white and small 
her hand is and what a jolly servant she must be to wear such 
sparkling rings.

She drops a piece of money in his hand without touching it, and 
shuddering as their hands approach.  "Now," she adds, "show me the 
spot again!"

Jo thrusts the handle of his broom between the bars of the gate, 
and with his utmost power of elaboration, points it out.  At 
length, looking aside to see if he has made himself intelligible, 
he finds that he is alone.

His first proceeding is to hold the piece of money to the gas-light 
and to be overpowered at finding that it is yellow--gold.  His next 
is to give it a one-sided bite at the edge as a test of its 
quality.  His next, to put it in his mouth for safety and to sweep 
the step and passage with great care.  His job done, he sets off 
for Tom-all-Alone's, stopping in the light of innumerable gas-lamps 
to produce the piece of gold and give it another one-sided bite as 
a reassurance of its being genuine.

The Mercury in powder is in no want of society to-night, for my 
Lady goes to a grand dinner and three or four balls.  Sir Leicester 
is fidgety down at Chesney Wold, with no better company than the 
goat; he complains to Mrs. Rouncewell that the rain makes such a 
monotonous pattering on the terrace that he can't read the paper 
even by the fireside in his own snug dressing-room.

"Sir Leicester would have done better to try the other side of the 
house, my dear," says Mrs. Rouncewell to Rosa.  "His dressing-room 
is on my Lady's side.  And in all these years I never heard the 
step upon the Ghost's Walk more distinct than it is to-night!"



CHAPTER XVII

Esther's Narrative


Richard very often came to see us while we remained in London 
(though he soon failed in his letter-writing), and with his quick 
abilities, his good spirits, his good temper, his gaiety and 
freshness, was always delightful.  But though I liked him more and 
more the better I knew him, I still felt more and more how much it 
was to be regretted that he had been educated in no habits of 
application and concentration.  The system which had addressed him 
in exactly the same manner as it had addressed hundreds of other 
boys, all varying in character and capacity, had enabled him to 
dash through his tasks, always with fair credit and often with 
distinction, but in a fitful, dazzling way that had confirmed his 
reliance on those very qualities in himself which it had been most 
desirable to direct and train.  They were good qualities, without 
which no high place can be meritoriously won, but like fire and 
water, though excellent servants, they were very bad masters.  If 
they had been under Richard's direction, they would have been his 
friends; but Richard being under their direction, they became his 
enemies.

I write down these opinions not because I believe that this or any 
other thing was so because I thought so, but only because I did 
think so and I want to be quite candid about all I thought and did.  
These were my thoughts about Richard.  I thought I often observed 
besides how right my guardian was in what he had said, and that the 
uncertainties and delays of the Chancery suit had imparted to his 
nature something of the careless spirit of a gamester who felt that 
he was part of a great gaming system.

Mr. and Mrs. Bayham Badger coming one afternoon when my guardian 
was not at home, in the course of conversation I naturally inquired 
after Richard.

"Why, Mr. Carstone," said Mrs. Badger, "is very well and is, I 
assure you, a great acquisition to our society.  Captain Swosser 
used to say of me that I was always better than land a-head and a 
breeze a-starn to the midshipmen's mess when the purser's junk had 
become as tough as the fore-topsel weather earings.  It was his 
naval way of mentioning generally that I was an acquisition to any 
society.  I may render the same tribute, I am sure, to Mr. 
Carstone.  But I--you won't think me premature if I mention it?"

I said no, as Mrs. Badger's insinuating tone seemed to require such 
an answer.

"Nor Miss Clare?" said Mrs. Bayham Badger sweetly.

Ada said no, too, and looked uneasy.

"Why, you see, my dears," said Mrs. Badger, "--you'll excuse me 
calling you my dears?"

We entreated Mrs. Badger not to mention it.

"Because you really are, if I may take the liberty of saying so," 
pursued Mrs. Badger, "so perfectly charming.  You see, my dears, 
that although I am still young--or Mr. Bayham Badger pays me the 
compliment of saying so--"

"No," Mr. Badger called out like some one contradicting at a public 
meeting.  "Not at all!"

"Very well," smiled Mrs. Badger, "we will say still young."

"Undoubtedly," said Mr. Badger.

"My dears, though still young, I have had many opportunities of 
observing young men.  There were many such on board the dear old 
Crippler, I assure you.  After that, when I was with Captain 
Swosser in the Mediterranean, I embraced every opportunity of 
knowing and befriending the midshipmen under Captain Swosser's 
command.  YOU never heard them called the young gentlemen, my 
dears, and probably wonld not understand allusions to their pipe-
claying their weekly accounts, but it is otherwise with me, for 
blue water has been a second home to me, and I have been quite a 
sailor.  Again, with Professor Dingo."

"A man of European reputation," murmured Mr. Badger.

"When I lost my dear first and became the wife of my dear second," 
said Mrs. Badger, speaking of her former husbands as if they were 
parts of a charade, "I still enjoyed opportunities of observing 
youth.  The class attendant on Professor Dingo's lectures was a 
large one, and it became my pride, as the wife of an eminent 
scientific man seeking herself in science the utmost consolation it 
could impart, to throw our house open to the students as a kind of 
Scientific Exchange.  Every Tuesday evening there was lemonade and 
a mixed biscuit for all who chose to partake of those refreshments.  
And there was science to an unlimited extent."

"Remarkable assemblies those, Miss Summerson," said Mr. Badger 
reverentially.  "There must have been great intellectual friction 
going on there under the auspices of such a man!"

"And now," pursued Mrs. Badger, "now that I am the wife of my dear 
third, Mr. Badger, I still pursue those habits of observation which 
were formed during the lifetime of Captain Swosser and adapted to 
new and unexpected purposes during the lifetime of Professor Dingo.  
I therefore have not come to the consideration of Mr. Carstone as a 
neophyte.  And yet I am very much of the opinion, my dears, that he 
has not chosen his profession advisedly."

Ada looked so very anxious now that I asked Mrs. Badger on what she 
founded her supposition.

"My dear Miss Summerson," she replied, "on Mr. Carstone's character 
and conduct.  He is of such a very easy disposition that probably 
he would never think it worthwhile to mention how he really feels, 
but he feels languid about the profession.  He has not that 
positive interest in it which makes it his vocation.  If he has any 
decided impression in reference to it, I should say it was that it 
is a tiresome pursuit.  Now, this is not promising.  Young men like 
Mr. Allan Woodcourt who take it from a strong interest in all that 
it can do will find some reward in it through a great deal of work 
for a very little money and through years of considerable endurance 
and disappointment.  But I am quite convinced that this would never 
be the case with Mr. Carstone."

"Does Mr. Badger think so too?" asked Ada timidly.

"Why," said Mr. Badger, "to tell the truth, Miss Clare, this view 
of the matter had not occurred to me until Mrs. Badger mentioned 
it.  But when Mrs. Badger put it in that light, I naturally gave 
great consideration to it, knowing that Mrs. Badger's mind, in 
addition to its natural advantages, has had the rare advantage of 
being formed by two such very distinguished (I will even say 
illustrious) public men as Captain Swosser of the Royal Navy and 
Professor Dingo.  The conclusion at which I have arrived is--in 
short, is Mrs. Badger's conclusion."

"It was a maxim of Captain Swosser's," said Mrs. Badger, "speaking 
in his figurative naval manner, that when you make pitch hot, you 
cannot make it too hot; and that if you only have to swab a plank, 
you should swab it as if Davy Jones were after you.  It appears to 
me that this maxim is applicable to the medical as well as to the 
nautical profession.

"To all professions," observed Mr. Badger.  "It was admirably said 
by Captain Swosser.  Beautifully said."

"People objected to Professor Dingo when we were staying in the 
north of Devon after our marriage," said Mrs. Badger, "that he 
disfigured some of the houses and other buildings by chipping off 
fragments of those edifices with his little geological hammer.  But 
the professor replied that he knew of no building save the Temple 
of Science.  The principle is the same, I think?"

"Precisely the same," said Mr. Badger.  "Finely expressed!  The 
professor made the same remark, Miss Summerson, in his last 
illness, when (his mind wandering) he insisted on keeping his 
little hammer under the pillow and chipping at the countenances of 
the attendants.  The ruling passion!"

Although we could have dispensed with the length at which Mr. and 
Mrs. Badger pursued the conversation, we both felt that it was 
disinterested in them to express the opinion they had communicated 
to us and that there was a great probability of its being sound.  
We agreed to say nothing to Mr. Jarndyce until we had spoken to 
Richard; and as he was coming next evening, we resolved to have a 
very serious talk with him.

So after he had been a little while with Ada, I went in and found 
my darling (as I knew she would be) prepared to consider him 
thoroughly right in whatever he said.

"And how do you get on, Richard?" said I.  I always sat down on the 
other side of him.  He made quite a sister of me.

"Oh! Well enough!" said Richard.

"He can't say better than that, Esther, can he?" cried my pet 
triumphantly.

I tried to look at my pet in the wisest manner, but of course I 
couldn't.

"Well enough?" I repeated.

"Yes," said Richard, "well enough.  It's rather jog-trotty and 
humdrum.  But it'll do as well as anything else!"

"Oh! My dear Richard!" I remonstrated.

"What's the matter?" said Richard.

"Do as well as anything else!"

"I don't think there's any harm in that, Dame Durden," said Ada, 
looking so confidingly at me across him; "because if it will do as 
well as anything else, it will do very well, I hope."

"Oh, yes, I hope so," returned Richard, carelessly tossing his hair 
from his forehead.  "After all, it may be only a kind of probation 
till our suit is--I forgot though.  I am not to mention the suit.  
Forbidden ground!  Oh, yes, it's all right enough.  Let us talk 
about something else."

Ada would have done so willingly, and with a full persuasion that 
we had brought the question to a most satisfactory state.  But I 
thought it would be useless to stop there, so I began again.

"No, but Richard," said I, "and my dear Ada!  Consider how 
important it is to you both, and what a point of honour it is 
towards your cousin, that you, Richard, should be quite in earnest 
without any reservation.  I think we had better talk about this, 
really, Ada.  It will be too late very soon."

"Oh, yes!  We must talk about it!" said Ada.  "But I think Richard 
is right."

What was the use of my trying to look wise when she was so pretty, 
and so engaging, and so fond of him!

"Mr. and Mrs. Badger were here yesterday, Richard," said I, "and 
they seemed disposed to think that you had no great liking for the 
profession."

"Did they though?" said Richard.  "Oh! Well, that rather alters the 
case, because I had no idea that they thought so, and I should not 
have liked to disappoint or inconvenience them.  The fact is, I 
don't care much about it.  But, oh, it don't matter!  It'll do as 
well as anything else!"

"You hear him, Ada!" said I.

"The fact is," Richard proceeded, half thoughtfully and half 
jocosely, "it is not quite in my way.  I don't take to it.  And I 
get too much of Mrs. Bayham Badger's first and second."

"I am sure THAT'S very natural!" cried Ada, quite delighted.  "The 
very thing we both said yesterday, Esther!"

"Then," pursued Richard, "it's monotonous, and to-day is too like 
yesterday, and to-morrow is too like to-day."

"But I am afraid," said I, "this is an objection to all kinds of 
application--to life itself, except under some very uncommon 
circumstances."

"Do you think so?" returned Richard, still considering.  "Perhaps!  
Ha!  Why, then, you know," he added, suddenly becoming gay again, 
"we travel outside a circle to what I said just now.  It'll do as 
well as anything else.  Oh, it's all right enough!  Let us talk 
about something else."

But even Ada, with her loving face--and if it had seemed innocent 
and trusting when I first saw it in that memorable November fog, 
how much more did it seem now when I knew her innocent and trusting 
heart--even Ada shook her head at this and looked serious.  So I 
thought it a good opportunity to hint to Richard that if he were 
sometimes a little careless of himself, I was very sure he never 
meant to be careless of Ada, and that it was a part of his 
affectionate consideration for her not to slight the importance of 
a step that might influence both their lives.  This made him almost 
grave.

"My dear Mother Hubbard," he said, "that's the very thing!  I have 
thought of that several times and have been quite angry with myself 
for meaning to be so much in earnest and--somehow--not exactly 
being so.  I don't know how it is; I seem to want something or 
other to stand by.  Even you have no idea how fond I am of Ada (my 
darling cousin, I love you, so much!), but I don't settle down to 
constancy in other things.  It's such uphill work, and it takes 
such a time!" said Richard with an air of vexation.

"That may be," I suggested, "because you don't like what you have 
chosen."

"Poor fellow!" said Ada.  "I am sure I don't wonder at it!"

No.  It was not of the least use my trying to look wise.  I tried 
again, but how could I do it, or how could it have any effect if I 
could, while Ada rested her clasped hands upon his shoulder and 
while he looked at her tender blue eyes, and while they looked at 
him!

"You see, my precious girl," said Richard, passing her golden curls 
through and through his hand, "I was a little hasty perhaps; or I 
misunderstood my own inclinations perhaps.  They don't seem to lie 
in that direction.  I couldn't tell till I tried.  Now the question 
is whether it's worth-while to undo all that has been done.  It 
seems like making a great disturbance about nothing particular."

"My dear Richard," said I, "how CAN you say about nothing 
particular?"

"I don't mean absolutely that," he returned.  "I mean that it MAY 
be nothing particular because I may never want it."

Both Ada and I urged, in reply, not only that it was decidedly 
worth-while to undo what had been done, but that it must be undone.  
I then asked Richard whether he had thought of any more congenial 
pursuit.

"There, my dear Mrs. Shipton," said Richard, "you touch me home.  
Yes, I have.  I have been thinking that the law is the boy for me."

"The law!" repeated Ada as if she were afraid of the name.

"If I went into Kenge's office," said Richard, "and if I were 
placed under articles to Kenge, I should have my eye on the--hum!--
the forbidden ground--and should be able to study it, and master 
it, and to satisfy myself that it was not neglected and was being 
properly conducted.  I should be able to look after Ada's interests 
and my own interests (the same thing!); and I should peg away at 
Blackstone and all those fellows with the most tremendous ardour."

I was not by any means so sure of that, and I saw how his hankering 
after the vague things yet to come of those long-deferred hopes 
cast a shade on Ada's face.  But I thought it best to encourage him 
in any project of continuous exertion, and only advised him to be 
quite sure that his mind was made up now.

"My dear Minerva," said Richard, "I am as steady as you are.  I 
made a mistake; we are all liable to mistakes; I won't do so any 
more, and I'll become such a lawyer as is not often seen.  That is, 
you know," said Richard, relapsing into doubt, "if it really is 
worth-while, after all, to make such a disturbance about nothing 
particular!"

This led to our saying again, with a great deal of gravity, all 
that we had said already and to our coming to much the same 
conclusion afterwards.  But we so strongly advised Richard to be 
frank and open with Mr. Jarndyce, without a moment's delay, and his 
disposition was naturally so opposed to concealment that he sought 
him out at once (taking us with him) and made a full avowal.  
"Rick," said my guardian, after hearing him attentively, "we can 
retreat with honour, and we will.  But we must he careful--for our 
cousin s sake, Rick, for our cousin's sake--that we make no more 
such mistakes.  Therefore, in the matter of the law, we will have a 
good trial before we decide.  We will look before we leap, and take 
plenty of time about it."

Richard's energy was of such an impatient and fitful kind that he 
would have liked nothing better than to have gone to Mr. Kenge's 
office in that hour and to have entered into articles with him on 
the spot.  Submitting, however, with a good grace to the caution 
that we had shown to be so necessary, he contented himself with 
sitting down among us in his lightest spirits and talking as if his 
one unvarying purpose in life from childhood had been that one 
which now held possession of him.  My guardian was very kind and 
cordial with him, but rather grave, enough so to cause Ada, when he 
had departed and we were going upstairs to bed, to say, "Cousin 
John, I hope you don't think the worse of Richard?"

"No, my love," said he.

"Because it was very natural that Richard should be mistaken in 
such a difficult case.  It is not uncommon."

"No, no, my love," said he.  "Don't look unhappy."

"Oh, I am not unhappy, cousin John!" said Ada, smiling cheerfully, 
with her hand upon his shoulder, where she had put it in bidding 
him good night.  "But I should be a little so if you thought at all 
the worse of Richard."

"My dear," said Mr. Jarndyce, "I should think the worse of him only 
if you were ever in the least unhappy through his means.  I should 
be more disposed to quarrel with myself even then, than with poor 
Rick, for I brought you together.  But, tut, all this is nothing!  
He has time before him, and the race to run.  I think the worse of 
him?  Not I, my loving cousin!  And not you, I swear!"

"No, indeed, cousin John," said Ada, "I am sure I could not--I am 
sure I would not--think any ill of Richard if the whole world did.  
I could, and I would, think better of him then than at any other 
time!"

So quietly and honestly she said it, with her hands upon his 
shoulders--both hands now--and looking up into his face, like the 
picture of truth!

"I think," said my guardian, thoughtfully regarding her, "I think 
it must be somewhere written that the virtues of the mothers shall 
occasionally be visited on the children, as well as the sins of the 
father.  Good night, my rosebud.  Good night, little woman.  
Pleasant slumbers!  Happy dreams!"

This was the first time I ever saw him follow Ada with his eyes 
with something of a shadow on their benevolent expression.  I well 
remembered the look with which he had contemplated her and Richard 
when she was singing in the firelight; it was but a very little 
while since he had watched them passing down the room in which the 
sun was shining, and away into the shade; but his glance was 
changed, and even the silent look of confidence in me which now 
followed it once more was not quite so hopeful and untroubled as it 
had originally been.

Ada praised Richard more to me that night than ever she had praised 
him yet.  She went to sleep with a little bracelet he had given her 
clasped upon her arm.  I fancied she was dreaming of him when I 
kissed her cheek after she had slept an hour and saw how tranquil 
and happy she looked.

For I was so little inclined to sleep myself that night that I sat 
up working.  It would not be worth mentioning for its own sake, but 
I was wakeful and rather low-spirited.  I don't know why.  At least 
I don't think I know why.  At least, perhaps I do, but I don't 
think it matters.

At any rate, I made up my mind to be so dreadfully industrious that 
I would leave myself not a moment's leisure to be low-spirited.  
For I naturally said, "Esther!  You to be low-spirited.  YOU!"  And 
it really was time to say so, for I--yes, I really did see myself 
in the glass, almost crying.  "As if you had anything to make you 
unhappy, instead of everything to make you happy, you ungrateful 
heart!" said I.

If I could have made myself go to sleep, I would have done it 
directly, but not being able to do that, I took out of my basket 
some ornamental work for our house (I mean Bleak House) that I was 
busy with at that time and sat down to it with great determination.  
It was necessary to count all the stitches in that work, and I 
resolved to go on with it until I couldn't keep my eyes open, and 
then to go to bed.

I soon found myself very busy.  But I had left some silk downstairs 
in a work-table drawer in the temporary growlery, and coming to a 
stop for want of it, I took my candle and went softly down to get 
it.  To my great surprise, on going in I found my guardian still 
there, and sitting looking at the ashes.  He was lost in thought, 
his book lay unheeded by his side, his silvered iron-grey hair was 
scattered confusedly upon his forehead as though his hand had been 
wandering among it while his thoughts were elsewhere, and his face 
looked worn.  Almost frightened by coming upon him so unexpectedly, 
I stood still for a moment and should have retired without speaking 
had he not, in again passing his hand abstractedly through his 
hair, seen me and started.

"Esther!"

I told him what I had come for.

"At work so late, my dear?"

"I am working late to-night," said I, "because I couldn't sleep and 
wished to tire myself.  But, dear guardian, you are late too, and 
look weary.  You have no trouble, I hope, to keep you waking?"

"None, little woman, that YOU would readily understand," said he.

He spoke in a regretful tone so new to me that I inwardly repeated, 
as if that would help me to his meaning, "That I could readily 
understand!"

"Remain a moment, Esther," said he, "You were in my thoughts."

"I hope I was not the trouble, guardian?"

He slightly waved his hand and fell into his usual manner.  The 
change was so remarkable, and he appeared to make it by dint of so 
much self-command, that I found myself again inwardly repeating, 
"None that I could understand!"

"Little woman," said my guardian, "I was thinking--that is, I have 
been thinking since I have been sitting here--that you ought to 
know of your own history all I know.  It is very little.  Next to 
nothing."

"Dear guardian," I replied, "when you spoke to me before on that 
subject--"

"But since then," he gravely interposed, anticipating what I meant 
to say, "I have reflected that your having anything to ask me, and 
my having anything to tell you, are different considerations, 
Esther.  It is perhaps my duty to impart to you the little I know."

"If you think so, guardian, it is right."

"I think so," he returned very gently, and kindly, and very 
distinctly.  "My dear, I think so now.  If any real disadvantage 
can attach to your position in the mind of any man or woman worth a 
thought, it is right that you at least of all the world should not 
magnify it to yourself by having vague impressions of its nature."

I sat down and said after a little effort to be as calm as I ought 
to be, "One of my earliest remembrances, guardian, is of these 
words: 'Your mother, Esther, is your disgrace, and you were hers.  
The time will come, and soon enough, when you will understand this 
better, and will feel it too, as no one save a woman can.'"  I had 
covered my face with my hands in repeating the words, but I took 
them away now with a better kind of shame, I hope, and told him 
that to him I owed the blessing that I had from my childhood to 
that hour never, never, never felt it.  He put up his hand as if to 
stop me.  I well knew that he was never to be thanked, and said no 
more.

"Nine years, my dear," he said after thinking for a little while, 
"have passed since I received a letter from a lady living in 
seclusion, written with a stern passion and power that rendered it 
unlike all other letters I have ever read.  It was written to me 
(as it told me in so many words), perhaps because it was the 
writer's idiosyncrasy to put that trust in me, perhaps because it 
was mine to justify it.  It told me of a child, an orphan girl then 
twelve years old, in some such cruel words as those which live in 
your remembrance.  It told me that the writer had bred her in 
secrecy from her birth, had blotted out all trace of her existence, 
and that if the writer were to die before the child became a woman, 
she would be left entirely friendless, nameless, and unknown.  It 
asked me to consider if I would, in that case, finish what the 
writer had begun."

I listened in silence and looked attentively at him.

"Your early recollection, my dear, will supply the gloomy medium 
through which all this was seen and expressed by the writer, and 
the distorted religion which clouded her mind with impressions of 
the need there was for the child to expiate an offence of which she 
was quite innocent.  I felt concerned for the little creature, in 
her darkened life, and replied to the letter."

I took his hand and kissed it.

"It laid the injunction on me that I should never propose to see 
the writer, who had long been estranged from all intercourse with 
the world, but who would see a confidential agent if I would 
appoint one.  I accredited Mr. Kenge.  The lady said, of her own 
accord and not of his seeking, that her name was an assumed one.  
That she was, if there were any ties of blood in such a case, the 
child's aunt.  That more than this she would never (and he was well 
persuaded of the steadfastness of her resolution) for any human 
consideration disclose.  My dear, I have told you all."

I held his hand for a little while in mine.

"I saw my ward oftener than she saw me," he added, cheerily making 
light of it, "and I always knew she was beloved, useful, and happy.  
She repays me twenty-thousandfold, and twenty more to that, every 
hour in every day!"

"And oftener still," said I, '"she blesses the guardian who is a 
father to her!"

At the word father, I saw his former trouble come into his face.  
He subdued it as before, and it was gone in an instant; but it had 
been there and it had come so swiftly upon my words that I felt as 
if they had given him a shock.  I again inwardly repeated, 
wondering, "That I could readily understand.  None that I could 
readily understand!"  No, it was true.  I did not understand it.  
Not for many and many a day.

"Take a fatherly good night, my dear," said he, kissing me on the 
forehead, "and so to rest.  These are late hours for working and 
thinking.  You do that for all of us, all day long, little 
housekeeper!"

I neither worked nor thought any more that night.  I opened my 
grateful heart to heaven in thankfulness for its providence to me 
and its care of me, and fell asleep.

We had a visitor next day.  Mr. Allan Woodcourt came.  He came to 
take leave of us; he had settled to do so beforehand.  He was going 
to China and to India as a surgeon on board ship.  He was to be 
away a long, long time.

I believe--at least I know--that he was not rich.  All his widowed 
mother could spare had been spent in qualifying him for his 
profession.  It was not lucrative to a young practitioner, with 
very little influence in London; and although he was, night and 
day, at the service of numbers of poor people and did wonders of 
gentleness and skill for them, he gained very little by it in 
money.  He was seven years older than I.  Not that I need mention 
it, for it hardly seems to belong to anything.

I think--I mean, he told us--that he had been in practice three or 
four years and that if he could have hoped to contend through three 
or four more, he would not have made the voyage on which he was 
bound.  But he had no fortune or private means, and so he was going 
away.  He had been to see us several times altogether.  We thought 
it a pity he should go away.  Because he was distinguished in his 
art among those who knew it best, and some of the greatest men 
belonging to it had a high opinion of him.

When he came to bid us good-bye, he brought his mother with him for 
the first time.  She was a pretty old lady, with bright black eyes, 
but she seemed proud.  She came from Wales and had had, a long time 
ago, an eminent person for an ancestor, of the name of Morgan ap-
Kerrig--of some place that sounded like Gimlet--who was the most 
illustrious person that ever was known and all of whose relations 
were a sort of royal family.  He appeared to have passed his life 
in always getting up into mountains and fighting somebody; and a 
bard whose name sounded like Crumlinwallinwer had sung his praises 
in a piece which was called, as nearly as I could catch it, 
Mewlinnwillinwodd.

Mrs. Woodcourt, after expatiating to us on the fame of her great 
kinsman, said that no doubt wherever her son Allan went he would 
remember his pedigree and would on no account form an alliance 
below it.  She told him that there were many handsome English 
ladies in India who went out on speculation, and that there were 
some to be picked up with property, but that neither charms nor 
wealth would suffice for the descendant from such a line without 
birth, which must ever be the first consideration.  She talked so 
much about birth that for a moment I half fancied, and with pain--  
But what an idle fancy to suppose that she could think or care what 
MINE was!

Mr. Woodcourt seemed a little distressed by her prolixity, but he 
was too considerate to let her see it and contrived delicately to 
bring the conversation round to making his acknowledgments to my 
guardian for his hospitality and for the very happy hours--he 
called them the very happy hours--he had passed with us.  The 
recollection of them, he said, would go with him wherever he went 
and would be always treasured.  And so we gave him our hands, one 
after another--at least, they did--and I did; and so he put his 
lips to Ada's hand--and to mine; and so he went away upon his long, 
long voyage!

I was very busy indeed all day and wrote directions home to the 
servants, and wrote notes for my guardian, and dusted his books and 
papers, and jingled my housekeeping keys a good deal, one way and 
another.  I was still busy between the lights, singing and working 
by the window, when who should come in but Caddy, whom I had no 
expectation of seeing!

"Why, Caddy, my dear," said I, "what beautiful flowers!"

She had such an exquisite little nosegay in her hand.

"Indeed, I think so, Esther," replied Caddy.  "They are the 
loveliest I ever saw."

"Prince, my dear?" said I in a whisper.

"No," answered Caddy, shaking her head and holding them to me to 
smell.  "Not Prince."

"Well, to be sure, Caddy!" said I.  "You must have two lovers!"

"What?  Do they look like that sort of thing?" said Caddy.

"Do they look like that sort of thing?" I repeated, pinching her 
cheek.

Caddy only laughed in return, and telling me that she had come for 
half an hour, at the expiration of which time Prince would be 
waiting for her at the corner, sat chatting with me and Ada in the 
window, every now and then handing me the flowers again or trying 
how they looked against my hair.  At last, when she was going, she 
took me into my room and put them in my dress.

"For me?" said I, surprised.

"For you," said Caddy with a kiss.  "They were left behind by 
somebody."

"Left behind?"

"At poor Miss Flite's," said Caddy.  "Somebody who has been very 
good to her was hurrying away an hour ago to join a ship and left 
these flowers behind.  No, no!  Don't take them out.  Let the 
pretty little things lie here," said Caddy, adjusting them with a 
careful hand, "because I was present myself, and I shouldn't wonder 
if somebody left them on purpose!"

"Do they look like that sort of thing?" said Ada, coming laughingly 
behind me and clasping me merrily round the waist.  "Oh, yes, 
indeed they do, Dame Durden!  They look very, very like that sort 
of thing.  Oh, very like it indeed, my dear!"



CHAPTER XVIII

Lady Dedlock


It was not so easy as it had appeared at first to arrange for 
Richard's making a trial of Mr. Kenge's office.  Richard himself 
was the chief impediment.  As soon as he had it in his power to 
leave Mr. Badger at any moment, he began to doubt whether he wanted 
to leave him at all.  He didn't know, he said, really.  It wasn't a 
bad profession; he couldn't assert that he disliked it; perhaps he 
liked it as well as he liked any other--suppose he gave it one more 
chance!  Upon that, he shut himself up for a few weeks with some 
books and some bones and seemed to acquire a considerable fund of 
information with great rapidity.  His fervour, after lasting about 
a month, began to cool, and when it was quite cooled, began to grow 
warm again.  His vacillations between law and medicine lasted so 
long that midsummer arrived before he finally separated from Mr. 
Badger and entered on an experimental course of Messrs. Kenge and 
Carboy.  For all his waywardness, he took great credit to himself 
as being determined to be in earnest "this time."  And he was so 
good-natured throughout, and in such high spirits, and so fond of 
Ada, that it was very difficult indeed to be otherwise than pleased 
with him.

"As to Mr. Jarndyce," who, I may mention, found the wind much 
given, during this period, to stick in the east; "As to Mr. 
Jarndyce," Richard would say to me, "he is the finest fellow in the 
world, Esther!  I must be particularly careful, if it were only for 
his satisfaction, to take myself well to task and have a regular 
wind-up of this business now."

The idea of his taking himself well to task, with that laughing 
face and heedless manner and with a fancy that everything could 
catch and nothing could hold, was ludicrously anomalous.  However, 
he told us between-whiles that he was doing it to such an extent 
that he wondered his hair didn't turn grey.  His regular wind-up of 
the business was (as I have said) that he went to Mr. Kenge's about 
midsummer to try how he liked it.

All this time he was, in money affairs, what I have described him 
in a former illustration--generous, profuse, wildly careless, but 
fully persuaded that he was rather calculating and prudent.  I 
happened to say to Ada, in his presence, half jestingly, half 
seriously, about the time of his going to Mr. Kenge's, that he 
needed to have Fortunatus' purse, he made so light of money, which 
he answered in this way, "My jewel of a dear cousin, you hear this 
old woman!  Why does she say that?  Because I gave eight pounds odd 
(or whatever it was) for a certain neat waistcoat and buttons a few 
days ago.  Now, if I had stayed at Badger's I should have been 
obliged to spend twelve pounds at a blow for some heart-breaking 
lecture-fees.  So I make four pounds--in a lump--by the 
transaction!"

It was a question much discussed between him and my guardian what 
arrangements should be made for his living in London while he 
experimented on the law, for we had long since gone back to Bleak 
House, and it was too far off to admit of his coming there oftener 
than once a week.  My guardian told me that if Richard were to 
settle down at Mr. Kenge's he would take some apartments or 
chambers where we too could occasionally stay for a few days at a 
time; "but, little woman," he added, rubbing his head very 
significantly, "he hasn't settled down there yet!"  The discussions 
ended in our hiring for him, by the month, a neat little furnished 
lodging in a quiet old house near Queen Square.  He immediately 
began to spend all the money he had in buying the oddest little 
ornaments and luxuries for this lodging; and so often as Ada and I 
dissuaded him from making any purchase that he had in contemplation 
which was particularly unnecessary and expensive, he took credit 
for what it would have cost and made out that to spend anything 
less on something else was to save the difference.

While these affairs were in abeyance, our visit to Mr. Boythorn's 
was postponed.  At length, Richard having taken possession of his 
lodging, there was nothing to prevent our departure.  He could have 
gone with us at that time of the year very well, but he was in the 
full novelty of his new position and was making most energetic 
attempts to unravel the mysteries of the fatal suit.  Consequently 
we went without him, and my darling was delighted to praise him for 
being so busy.

We made a pleasant journey down into Lincolnshire by the coach and 
had an entertaining companion in Mr. Skimpole.  His furniture had 
been all cleared off, it appeared, by the person who took 
possession of it on his blue-eyed daughter's birthday, but he 
seemed quite relieved to think that it was gone.  Chairs and table, 
he said, were wearisome objects; they were monotonous ideas, they 
had no variety of expression, they looked you out of countenance, 
and you looked them out of countenance.  How pleasant, then, to be 
bound to no particular chairs and tables, but to sport like a 
butterfly among all the furniture on hire, and to flit from 
rosewood to mahogany, and from mahogany to walnut, and from this 
shape to that, as the humour took one!

"The oddity of the thing is," said Mr. Skimpole with a quickened 
sense of the ludicrous, "that my chairs and tables were not paid 
for, and yet my landlord walks off with them as composedly as 
possible.  Now, that seems droll!  There is something grotesque in 
it.  The chair and table merchant never engaged to pay my landlord 
my rent.  Why should my landlord quarrel with HIM?  If I have a 
pimple on my nose which is disagreeable to my landlord's peculiar 
ideas of beauty, my landlord has no business to scratch my chair 
and table merchant's nose, which has no pimple on it.  His 
reasoning seems defective!"

"Well," said my guardian good-humouredly, "it's pretty clear that 
whoever became security for those chairs and tables will have to 
pay for them."

"Exactly!" returned Mr. Skimpole.  "That's the crowning point of 
unreason in the business!  I said to my landlord, 'My good man, you 
are not aware that my excellent friend Jarndyce will have to pay 
for those things that you are sweeping off in that indelicate 
manner.  Have you no consideration for HIS property?' He hadn't the 
least."

"And refused all proposals," said my guardian.

"Refused all proposals," returned Mr. Skimpole.  "I made him 
business proposals.  I had him into my room.  I said, 'You are a 
man of business, I believe?'  He replied, 'I am,'  'Very well,' 
said I, 'now let us be business-like.  Here is an inkstand, here 
are pens and paper, here are wafers.  What do you want?  I have 
occupied your house for a considerable period, I believe to our 
mutual satisfaction until this unpleasant misunderstanding arose; 
let us be at once friendly and business-like.  What do you want?'  
In reply to this, he made use of the figurative expression--which 
has something Eastern about it--that he had never seen the colour 
of my money.  'My amiable friend,' said I, 'I never have any money.  
I never know anything about money.'  'Well, sir,' said he, 'what do 
you offer if I give you time?'  'My good fellow,' said I, 'I have 
no idea of time; but you say you are a man of business, and 
whatever you can suggest to be done in a business-like way with 
pen, and ink, and paper--and wafers--I am ready to do.  Don't pay 
yourself at another man's expense (which is foolish), but be 
business-like!'  However, he wouldn't be, and there was an end of 
it."

If these were some of the inconveniences of Mr. Skimpole's 
childhood, it assuredly possessed its advantages too.  On the 
journey he had a very good appetite for such refreshment as came in 
our way (including a basket of choice hothouse peaches), but never 
thought of paying for anything.  So when the coachman came round 
for his fee, he pleasantly asked him what he considered a very good 
fee indeed, now--a liberal one--and on his replying half a crown 
for a single passenger, said it was little enough too, all things 
considered, and left Mr. Jarndyce to give it him.

It was delightful weather.  The green corn waved so beautifully, 
the larks sang so joyfully, the hedges were so full of wild 
flowers, the trees were so thickly out in leaf, the bean-fields, 
with a light wind blowing over them, filled the air with such a 
delicious fragrance!  Late in the afternoon we came to the market-
town where we were to alight from the coach--a dull little town 
with a church-spire, and a marketplace, and a market-cross, and one 
intensely sunny street, and a pond with an old horse cooling his 
legs in it, and a very few men sleepily lying and standing about in 
narrow little bits of shade.  After the rustling of the leaves and 
the waving of the corn all along the road, it looked as still, as 
hot, as motionless a little town as England could produce.

At the inn we found Mr. Boythorn on horseback, waiting with an open 
carriage to take us to his house, which was a few miles off.  He 
was over-joyed to see us and dismounted with great alacrity.

"By heaven!" said he after giving us a courteous greeting.  This a 
most infamous coach.  It is the most flagrant example of an 
abominable public vehicle that ever encumbered the face of the 
earth.  It is twenty-five minutes after its time this afternoon.  
The coachman ought to be put to death!"

"IS he after his time?" said Mr. Skimpole, to whom he happened to 
address himself.  "You know my infirmity."

"Twenty-five minutes!  Twenty-six minutes!" replied Mr. Boythorn, 
referring to his watch.  "With two ladies in the coach, this 
scoundrel has deliberately delayed his arrival six and twenty 
minutes.  Deliberately!  It is impossible that it can be 
accidental!  But his father--and his uncle--were the most 
profligate coachmen that ever sat upon a box."

While he said this in tones of the greatest indignation, he handed 
us into the little phaeton with the utmost gentleness and was all 
smiles and pleasure.

"I am sorry, ladies," he said, standing bare-headed at the 
carriage-door when all was ready, "that I am obliged to conduct you 
nearly two miles out of the way.  But our direct road lies through 
Sir Leicester Dedlock's park, and in that fellow's property I have 
sworn never to set foot of mine, or horse's foot of mine, pending 
the present relations between us, while I breathe the breath of 
life!"  And here, catching my guardian's eye, he broke into one of 
his tremendous laughs, which seemed to shake even the motionless 
little market-town.

"Are the Dedlocks down here, Lawrence?" said my guardian as we 
drove along and Mr. Boythorn trotted on the green turf by the 
roadside.

"Sir Arrogant Numskull is here," replied Mr. Boythorn.  "Ha ha ha!  
Sir Arrogant is here, and I am glad to say, has been laid by the 
heels here.  My Lady," in naming whom he always made a courtly 
gesture as if particularly to exclude her from any part in the 
quarrel, "is expected, I believe, daily.  I am not in the least 
surprised that she postpones her appearance as long as possible.  
Whatever can have induced that transcendent woman to marry that 
effigy and figure-head of a baronet is one of the most impenetrable 
mysteries that ever baffled human inquiry.  Ha ha ha ha!"

"I suppose, said my guardian, laughing, "WE may set foot in the 
park while we are here?  The prohibition does not extend to us, 
does it?"

"I can lay no prohibition on my guests," he said, bending his head 
to Ada and me with the smiling politeness which sat so gracefully 
upon him, "except in the matter of their departure.  I am only 
sorry that I cannot have the happiness of being their escort about 
Chesney Wold, which is a very fine place!  But by the light of this 
summer day, Jarndyce, if you call upon the owner while you stay 
with me, you are likely to have but a cool reception.  He carries 
himself like an eight-day clock at all times, like one of a race of 
eight-day clocks in gorgeous cases that never go and never went--Ha 
ha ha!--but he will have some extra stiffness, I can promise you, 
for the friends of his friend and neighbour Boythorn!"

"I shall not put him to the proof," said my guardian.  "He is as 
indifferent to the honour of knowing me, I dare say, as I am to the 
honour of knowing him.  The air of the grounds and perhaps such a 
view of the house as any other sightseer might get are quite enough 
for me."

"Well!" said Mr. Boythorn.  "I am glad of it on the whole.  It's in 
better keeping.  I am looked upon about here as a second Ajax 
defying the lightning.  Ha ha ha ha!  When I go into our little 
church on a Sunday, a considerable part of the inconsiderable 
congregation expect to see me drop, scorched and withered, on the 
pavement under the Dedlock displeasure.  Ha ha ha ha!  I have no 
doubt he is surprised that I don't.  For he is, by heaven, the most 
self-satisfied, and the shallowest, and the most coxcombical and 
utterly brainless ass!"

Our coming to the ridge of a hill we had been ascending enabled our 
friend to point out Chesney Wold itself to us and diverted his 
attention from its master.

It was a picturesque old house in a fine park richly wooded.  Among 
the trees and not far from the residence he pointed out the spire 
of the little church of which he had spoken.  Oh, the solemn woods 
over which the light and shadow travelled swiftly, as if heavenly 
wings were sweeping on benignant errands through the summer air; 
the smooth green slopes, the glittering water, the garden where the 
flowers were so symmetrically arranged in clusters of the richest 
colours, how beautiful they looked!  The house, with gable and 
chimney, and tower, and turret, and dark doorway, and broad 
terrace-walk, twining among the balustrades of which, and lying 
heaped upon the vases, there was one great flush of roses, seemed 
scarcely real in its light solidity and in the serene and peaceful 
hush that rested on all around it.  To Ada and to me, that above 
all appeared the pervading influence.  On everything, house, 
garden, terrace, green slopes, water, old oaks, fern, moss, woods 
again, and far away across the openings in the prospect to the 
distance lying wide before us with a purple bloom upon it, there 
seemed to be such undisturbed repose.

When we came into the little village and passed a small inn with 
the sign of the Dedlock Arms swinging over the road in front, Mr. 
Boythorn interchanged greetings with a young gentleman sitting on a 
bench outside the inn-door who had some fishing-tackle lying beside 
him.

"That's the housekeeper's grandson, Mr. Rouncewell by name," said, 
he, "and he is in love with a pretty girl up at the house.  Lady 
Dedlock has taken a fancy to the pretty girl and is going to keep 
her about her own fair person--an honour which my young friend 
himself does not at all appreciate.  However, he can't marry just 
yet, even if his Rosebud were willing; so he is fain to make the 
best of it.  In the meanwhile, he comes here pretty often for a day 
or two at a time to--fish.  Ha ha ha ha!"

"Are he and the pretty girl engaged, Mr. Boythorn?" asked Ada.

"Why, my dear Miss Clare," he returned, "I think they may perhaps 
understand each other; but you will see them soon, I dare say, and 
I must learn from you on such a point--not you from me."

Ada blushed, and Mr. Boythorn, trotting forward on his comely grey 
horse, dismounted at his own door and stood ready with extended arm 
and uncovered head to welcome us when we arrived.

He lived in a pretty house, formerly the parsonage house, with a 
lawn in front, a bright flower-garden at the side, and a well-
stocked orchard and kitchen-garden in the rear, enclosed with a 
venerable wall that had of itself a ripened ruddy look.  But, 
indeed, everything about the place wore an aspect of maturity and 
abundance.  The old lime-tree walk was like green cloisters, the 
very shadows of the cherry-trees and apple-trees were heavy with 
fruit, the gooseberry-bushes were so laden that their branches 
arched and rested on the earth, the strawberries and raspberries 
grew in like profusion, and the peaches basked by the hundred on 
the wall.  Tumbled about among the spread nets and the glass frames 
sparkling and winking in the sun there were such heaps of drooping 
pods, and marrows, and cucumbers, that every foot of ground 
appeared a vegetable treasury, while the smell of sweet herbs and 
all kinds of wholesome growth (to say nothing of the neighbouring 
meadows where the hay was carrying) made the whole air a great 
nosegay.  Such stillness and composure reigned within the orderly 
precincts of the old red wall that even the feathers hung in 
garlands to scare the birds hardly stirred; and the wall had such a 
ripening influence that where, here and there high up, a disused 
nail and scrap of list still clung to it, it was easy to fancy that 
they had mellowed with the changing seasons and that they had 
rusted and decayed according to the common fate.

The house, though a little disorderly in comparison with the 
garden, was a real old house with settles in the chimney of the 
brick-floored kitchen and great beams across the ceilings.  On one 
side of it was the terrible piece of ground in dispute, where Mr. 
Boythorn maintained a sentry in a smock-frock day and night, whose 
duty was supposed to be, in cases of aggression, immediately to 
ring a large bell hung up there for the purpose, to unchain a great 
bull-dog established in a kennel as his ally, and generally to deal 
destruction on the enemy.  Not content with these precautions, Mr. 
Boythorn had himself composed and posted there, on painted boards 
to which his name was attached in large letters, the following 
solemn warnings: "Beware of the bull-dog.  He is most ferocious.  
Lawrence Boythorn."  "The blunderbus is loaded with slugs.  
Lawrence Boythorn."  "Man-traps and spring-guns are set here at all 
times of the day and night.  Lawrence Boythorn."  "Take notice.  
That any person or persons audaciously presuming to trespass on 
this property will be punished with the utmost severity of private 
chastisement and prosecuted with the utmost rigour of the law.  
Lawrence Boythorn."  These he showed us from the drawing-room 
window, while his bird was hopping about his head, and he laughed, 
"Ha ha ha ha!  Ha ha ha ha!" to that extent as he pointed them out 
that I really thought he would have hurt himself.

"But this is taking a good deal of trouble," said Mr. Skimpole in 
his light way, "when you are not in earnest after all."

"Not in earnest!" returned Mr. Boythorn with unspeakable warmth.  
"Not in earnest!  If I could have hoped to train him, I would have 
bought a lion instead of that dog and would have turned him loose 
upon the first intolerable robber who should dare to make an 
encroachment on my rights.  Let Sir Leicester Dedlock consent to 
come out and decide this question by single combat, and I will meet 
him with any weapon known to mankind in any age or country.  I am 
that much in earnest.  Not more!"

We arrived at his house on a Saturday.  On the Sunday morning we 
all set forth to walk to the little church in the park.  Entering 
the park, almost immediately by the disputed ground, we pursued a 
pleasant footpath winding among the verdant turf and the beautiful 
trees until it brought us to the church-porch.

The congregation was extremely small and quite a rustic one with 
the exception of a large muster of servants from the house, some of 
whom were already in their seats, while others were yet dropping 
in.  There were some stately footmen, and there was a perfect 
picture of an old coachman, who looked as if he were the official 
representative of all the pomps and vanities that had ever been put 
into his coach.  There was a very pretty show of young women, and 
above them, the handsome old face and fine responsible portly 
figure of the housekeeper towered pre-eminent.  The pretty girl of 
whom Mr. Boythorn had told us was close by her.  She was so very 
pretty that I might have known her by her beauty even if I had not 
seen how blushingly conscious she was of the eyes of the young 
fisherman, whom I discovered not far off.  One face, and not an 
agreeable one, though it was handsome, seemed maliciously watchful 
of this pretty girl, and indeed of every one and everything there.  
It was a Frenchwoman's.

As the bell was yet ringing and the great people were not yet come, 
I had leisure to glance over the church, which smelt as earthy as a 
grave, and to think what a shady, ancient, solemn little church it 
was.  The windows, heavily shaded by trees, admitted a subdued 
light that made the faces around me pale, and darkened the old 
brasses in the pavement and the time and damp-worn monuments, and 
rendered the sunshine in the little porch, where a monotonous 
ringer was working at the bell, inestimably bright.  But a stir in 
that direction, a gathering of reverential awe in the rustic faces, 
and a blandly ferocious assumption on the part of Mr. Boythorn of 
being resolutely unconscious of somebody's existence forewarned me 
that the great people were come and that the service was going to 
begin.

"'Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for in thy 
sight--'"

Shall I ever forget the rapid beating at my heart, occasioned by 
the look I met as I stood up!  Shall I ever forget the manner in 
which those handsome proud eyes seemed to spring out of their 
languor and to hold mine!  It was only a moment before I cast mine 
down--released again, if I may say so--on my book; but I knew the 
beautiful face quite well in that short space of time.

And, very strangely, there was something quickened within me, 
associated with the lonely days at my godmother's; yes, away even 
to the days when I had stood on tiptoe to dress myself at my little 
glass after dressing my doll.  And this, although I had never seen 
this lady's face before in all my life--I was quite sure of it--
absolutely certain.

It was easy to know that the ceremonious, gouty, grey-haired 
gentleman, the only other occupant of the great pew, was Sir 
Leicester Dedlock, and that the lady was Lady Dedlock.  But why her 
face should be, in a confused way, like a broken glass to me, in 
which I saw scraps of old remembrances, and why I should be so 
fluttered and troubled (for I was still) by having casually met her 
eyes, I could not think.

I felt it to be an unmeaning weakness in me and tried to overcome 
it by attending to the words I heard.  Then, very strangely, I 
seemed to hear them, not in the reader's voice, but in the well-
remembered voice of my godmother.  This made me think, did Lady 
Dedlock's face accidentally resemble my godmother's?  It might be 
that it did, a little; but the expression was so different, and the 
stern decision which had worn into my godmother's face, like 
weather into rocks, was so completely wanting in the face before me 
that it could not be that resemblance which had struck me.  Neither 
did I know the loftiness and haughtiness of Lady Dedlock's face, at 
all, in any one.  And yet I--I, little Esther Summerson, the child 
who lived a life apart and on whose birthday there was no 
rejoicing--seemed to arise before my own eyes, evoked out of the 
past by some power in this fashionable lady, whom I not only 
entertained no fancy that I had ever seen, but whom I perfectly 
well knew I had never seen until that hour.

It made me tremble so to be thrown into this unaccountable 
agitation that I was conscious of being distressed even by the 
observation of the French maid, though I knew she had been looking 
watchfully here, and there, and everywhere, from the moment of her 
coming into the church.  By degrees, though very slowly, I at last 
overcame my strange emotion.  After a long time, I looked towards 
Lady Dedlock again.  It was while they were preparing to sing, 
before the sermon.  She took no heed of me, and the beating at my 
heart was gone.  Neither did it revive for more than a few moments 
when she once or twice afterwards glanced at Ada or at me through 
her glass.

The service being concluded, Sir Leicester gave his arm with much 
taste and gallantry to Lady Dedlock--though he was obliged to walk 
by the help of a thick stick--and escorted her out of church to the 
pony carriage in which they had come.  The servants then dispersed, 
and so did the congregation, whom Sir Leicester had contemplated 
all along (Mr. Skimpole said to Mr. Boythorn's infinite delight) as 
if he were a considerable landed proprietor in heaven.

"He believes he is!" said Mr. Boythorn.  "He firmly believes it.  
So did his father, and his grandfather, and his great-grandfather!"

"Do you know," pursued Mr. Skimpole very unexpectedly to Mr. 
Boythorn, "it's agreeable to me to see a man of that sort."

"IS it!" said Mr. Boytborn.

"Say that he wants to patronize me," pursued Mr. Skimpole.  "Very 
well!  I don't object."

"I do," said Mr. Boythorn with great vigour.

"Do you really?" returned Mr. Skimpole in his easy light vein.  
"But that's taking trouble, surely.  And why should you take 
trouble?  Here am I, content to receive things childishly as they 
fall out, and I never take trouble!  I come down here, for 
instance, and I find a mighty potentate exacting homage.  Very 
well!  I say 'Mighty potentate, here IS my homage!  It's easier to 
give it than to withhold it.  Here it is.  If you have anything of 
an agreeable nature to show me, I shall be happy to see it; if you 
have anything of an agreeable nature to give me, I shall be happy 
to accept it.'  Mighty potentate replies in effect, 'This is a 
sensible fellow.  I find him accord with my digestion and my 
bilious system.  He doesn't impose upon me the necessity of rolling 
myself up like a hedgehog with my points outward.  I expand, I 
open, I turn my silver lining outward like Milton's cloud, and it's 
more agreeable to both of us.'  That's my view of such things, 
speaking as a child!"

"But suppose you went down somewhere else to-morrow," said Mr. 
Boythorn, "where there was the opposite of that fellow--or of this 
fellow.  How then?"

"How then?" said Mr. Skimpole with an appearance of the utmost 
simplicity and candour.  "Just the same then!  I should say, 'My 
esteemed Boythorn'--to make you the personification of our 
imaginary friend--'my esteemed Boythorn, you object to the mighty 
potentate?  Very good.  So do I.  I take it that my business in the 
social system is to be agreeable; I take it that everybody's 
business in the social system is to be agreeable.  It's a system of 
harmony, in short.  Therefore if you object, I object.  Now, 
excellent Boythorn, let us go to dinner!'"

"But excellent Boythorn might say," returned our host, swelling and 
growing very red, "I'll be--"

"I understand," said Mr. Skimpole.  "Very likely he would."

"--if I WILL go to dinner!" cried Mr. Boythorn in a violent burst 
and stopping to strike his stick upon the ground.  "And he would 
probably add, 'Is there such a thing as principle, Mr. Harold 
Skimpole?'"

"To which Harold Skimpole would reply, you know," he returned in 
his gayest manner and with his most ingenuous smile, "'Upon my life 
I have not the least idea!  I don't know what it is you call by 
that name, or where it is, or who possesses it.  If you possess it 
and find it comfortable, I am quite delighted and congratulate you 
heartily.  But I know nothing about it, I assure you; for I am a 
mere child, and I lay no claim to it, and I don't want it!'  So, 
you see, excellent Boythorn and I would go to dinner after all!"

This was one of many little dialogues between them which I always 
expected to end, and which I dare say would have ended under other 
circumstances, in some violent explosion on the part of our host.  
But he had so high a sense of his hospitable and responsible 
position as our entertainer, and my guardian laughed so sincerely 
at and with Mr. Skimpole, as a child who blew bubbles and broke 
them all day long, that matters never went beyond this point.  Mr. 
Skimpole, who always seemed quite unconscious of having been on 
delicate ground, then betook himself to beginning some sketch in 
the park which be never finished, or to playing fragments of airs 
on the piano, or to singing scraps of songs, or to lying down on 
his back under a tree and looking at the sky--which he couldn't 
help thinking, he said, was what he was meant for; it suited him so 
exactly.

"Enterprise and effort," he would say to us (on his back), are 
delightful to me.  I believe I am truly cosmopolitan.  I have the 
deepest sympathy with them.  I lie in a shady place like this and 
think of adventurous spirits going to the North Pole or penetrating 
to the heart of the Torrid Zone with admiration.  Mercenary 
creatures ask, 'What is the use of a man's going to the North Pole?  
What good does it do?'  I can't say; but, for anything I CAN say, 
he may go for the purpose--though he don't know it--of employing my 
thoughts as I lie here.  Take an extreme case.  Take the case of 
the slaves on American plantations.  I dare say they are worked 
hard, I dare say they don't altogether like it.  I dare say theirs 
is an unpleasant experience on the whole; but they people the 
landscape for me, they give it a poetry for me, and perhaps that is 
one of the pleasanter objects of their existence.  I am very 
sensible of it, if it be, and I shouldn't wonder if it were!"

I always wondered on these occasions whether he ever thought of 
Mrs. Skimpole and the children, and in what point of view they 
presented themselves to his cosmopolitan mind.  So far as I could 
understand, they rarely presented themselves at all.

The week had gone round to the Saturday following that beating of 
my heart in the church; and every day had been so bright and blue 
that to ramble in the woods, and to see the light striking down 
among the transparent leaves and sparkling in the beautiful 
interlacings of the shadows of the trees, while the birds poured 
out their songs and the air was drowsy with the hum of insects, had 
been most delightful.  We had one favourite spot, deep in moss and 
last year's leaves, where there were some felled trees from which 
the bark was all stripped off.  Seated among these, we looked 
through a green vista supported by thousands of natural columns, 
the whitened stems of trees, upon a distant prospect made so 
radiant by its contrast with the shade in which we sat and made so 
precious by the arched perspective through which we saw it that it 
was like a glimpse of the better land.  Upon the Saturday we sat 
here, Mr. Jarndyce, Ada, and I, until we heard thunder muttering in 
the distance and felt the large raindrops rattle through the 
leaves.

The weather had been all the week extremely sultry, but the storm 
broke so suddenly--upon us, at least, in that sheltered spot--that 
before we reached the outskirts of the wood the thunder and 
lightning were frequent and the rain came plunging through the 
leaves as if every drop were a great leaden bead.  As it was not a 
time for standing among trees, we ran out of the wood, and up and 
down the moss-grown steps which crossed the plantation-fence like 
two broad-staved ladders placed back to back, and made for a 
keeper's lodge which was close at hand.  We had often noticed the 
dark beauty of this lodge standing in a deep twilight of trees, and 
how the ivy clustered over it, and how there was a steep hollow 
near, where we had once seen the keeper's dog dive down into the 
fern as if it were water.

The lodge was so dark within, now the sky was overcast, that we 
only clearly saw the man who came to the door when we took shelter 
there and put two chairs for Ada and me.  The lattice-windows were 
all thrown open, and we sat just within the doorway watching the 
storm.  It was grand to see how the wind awoke, and bent the trees, 
and drove the rain before it like a cloud of smoke; and to hear the 
solemn thunder and to see the lightning; and while thinking with 
awe of the tremendous powers by which our little lives are 
encompassed, to consider how beneficent they are and how upon the 
smallest flower and leaf there was already a freshness poured from 
all this seeming rage which seemed to make creation new again.

"Is it not dangerous to sit in so exposed a place?"

"Oh, no, Esther dear!" said Ada quietly.

Ada said it to me, but I had not spoken.

The beating of my heart came back again.  I had never heard the 
voice, as I had never seen the face, but it affected me in the same 
strange way.  Again, in a moment, there arose before my mind 
innumerable pictures of myself.

Lady Dedlock had taken shelter in the lodge before our arrival 
there and had come out of the gloom within.  She stood behind my 
chair with her hand upon it.  I saw her with her hand close to my 
shoulder when I turned my head.

"I have frightened you?" she said.

No.  It was not fright.  Why should I be frightened!

"I believe," said Lady Dedlock to my guardian, "I have the pleasure 
of speaking to Mr. Jarndyce."

"Your remembrance does me more honour than I had supposed it would, 
Lady Dedlock," he returned.

"I recognized you in church on Sunday.  I am sorry that any local 
disputes of Sir Leicester's--they are not of his seeking, however, 
I believe--should render it a matter of some absurd difficulty to 
show you any attention here."

"I am aware of the circumstances," returned my guardian with a 
smile, "and am sufficiently obliged."

She had given him her hand in an indifferent way that seemed 
habitual to her and spoke in a correspondingly indifferent manner, 
though in a very pleasant voice.  She was as graceful as she was 
beautiful, perfectly self-possessed, and had the air, I thought, of 
being able to attract and interest any one if she had thought it 
worth her while.  The keeper had brought her a chair on which she 
sat in the middle of the porch between us.

"Is the young gentleman disposed of whom you wrote to Sir Leicester 
about and whose wishes Sir Leicester was sorry not to have it in 
his power to advance in any way?" she said over her shoulder to my 
guardian.

"I hope so," said he.

She seemed to respect him and even to wish to conciliate him.  
There was something very winning in her haughty manner, and it 
became more familiar--I was going to say more easy, but that could 
hardly be--as she spoke to him over her shoulder.

"I presume this is your other ward, Miss Clare?"

He presented Ada, in form.

"You will lose the disinterested part of your Don Quixote 
character," said Lady Dedlock to Mr. Jarndyce over her shoulder 
again, "if you only redress the wrongs of beauty like this.  But 
present me," and she turned full upon me, "to this young lady too!"

"Miss Summerson really is my ward," said Mr. Jarndyce.  "I am 
responsible to no Lord Chancellor in her case."

"Has Miss Summerson lost both her parents?" said my Lady.

"Yes."

"She is very fortunate in her guardian."

Lady Dedlock looked at me, and I looked at her and said I was 
indeed.  All at once she turned from me with a hasty air, almost 
expressive of displeasure or dislike, and spoke to him over her 
shoulder again.

"Ages have passed since we were in the habit of meeting, Mr. 
Jarndyce."

"A long time.  At least I thought it was a long time, until I saw 
you last Sunday," he returned.

"What!  Even you are a courtier, or think it necessary to become 
one to me!" she said with some disdain.  "I have achieved that 
reputation, I suppose."

"You have achieved so much, Lady Dedlock," said my guardian, "that 
you pay some little penalty, I dare say.  But none to me."

"So much!" she repeated, slightly laughing.  "Yes!"

With her air of superiority, and power, and fascination, and I know 
not what, she seemed to regard Ada and me as little more than 
children.  So, as she slightly laughed and afterwards sat looking 
at the rain, she was as self-possessed and as free to occupy 
herself with her own thoughts as if she had been alone.

"I think you knew my sister when we were abroad together better 
than you know me?" she said, looking at him again.

"Yes, we happened to meet oftener," he returned.

"We went our several ways," said Lady Dedlock, "and had little in 
common even before we agreed to differ.  It is to be regretted, I 
suppose, but it could not be helped."

Lady Dedlock again sat looking at the rain.  The storm soon began 
to pass upon its way.  The shower greatly abated, the lightning 
ceased, the thunder rolled among the distant hills, and the sun 
began to glisten on the wet leaves and the falling rain.  As we sat 
there, silently, we saw a little pony phaeton coming towards us at 
a merry pace.

"The messenger is coming back, my Lady," said the keeper, "with the 
carriage."

As it drove up, we saw that there were two people inside.  There 
alighted from it, with some cloaks and wrappers, first the 
Frenchwoman whom I had seen in church, and secondly the pretty 
girl, the Frenchwoman with a defiant confidence, the pretty girl 
confused and hesitating.

"What now?" said Lady Dedlock.  "Two!"

"I am your maid, my Lady, at the present," said the Frenchwoman.  
"The message was for the attendant."

"I was afraid you might mean me, my Lady," said the pretty girl.

"I did mean you, child," replied her mistress calmly.  "Put that 
shawl on me."

She slightly stooped her shoulders to receive it, and the pretty 
girl lightly dropped it in its place.  The Frenchwoman stood 
unnoticed, looking on with her lips very tightly set.

"I am sorry," said Lady Dedlock to Mr. Jarndyce, "that we are not 
likely to renew our former acquaintance.  You will allow me to send 
the carriage back for your two wards.  It shall be here directly."

But as he would on no account accept this offer, she took a 
graceful leave of Ada--none of me--and put her hand upon his 
proffered arm, and got into the carriage, which was a little, low, 
park carriage with a hood.

"Come in, child," she said to the pretty girl; "I shall want you.  
Go on!"

The carriage rolled away, and the Frenchwoman, with the wrappers 
she had brought hanging over her arm, remained standing where she 
had alighted.

I suppose there is nothing pride can so little bear with as pride 
itself, and that she was punished for her imperious manner.  Her 
retaliation was the most singular I could have imagined.  She 
remained perfectly still until the carriage had turned into the 
drive, and then, without the least discomposure of countenance, 
slipped off her shoes, left them on the ground, and walked 
deliberately in the same direction through the wettest of the wet 
grass.

"Is that young woman mad?" said my guardian.

"Oh, no, sir!" said the keeper, who, with his wife, was looking 
after her.  "Hortense is not one of that sort.  She has as good a 
head-piece as the best.  But she's mortal high and passionate--
powerful high and passionate; and what with having notice to leave, 
and having others put above her, she don't take kindly to it."

"But why should she walk shoeless through all that water?" said my 
guardian.

"Why, indeed, sir, unless it is to cool her down!" said the man.

"Or unless she fancies it's blood," said the woman.  "She'd as soon 
walk through that as anything else, I think, when her own's up!"

We passed not far from the house a few minutes afterwards.  
Peaceful as it had looked when we first saw it, it looked even more 
so now, with a diamond spray glittering all about it, a light wind 
blowing, the birds no longer hushed but singing strongly, 
everything refreshed by the late rain, and the little carriage 
shining at the doorway like a fairy carriage made of silver.  
Still, very steadfastly and quietly walking towards it, a peaceful 
figure too in the landscape, went Mademoiselle Hortense, shoeless, 
through the wet grass.



CHAPTER XIX

Moving On


It is the long vacation in the regions of Chancery Lane.  The good 
ships Law and Equity, those teak-built, copper-bottomed, iron-
fastened, brazen-faced, and not by any means fast-sailing clippers 
are laid up in ordinary.  The Flying Dutchman, with a crew of 
ghostly clients imploring all whom they may encounter to peruse 
their papers, has drifted, for the time being, heaven knows where.  
The courts are all shut up; the public offices lie in a hot sleep.  
Westminster Hall itself is a shady solitude where nightingales 
might sing, and a tenderer class of suitors than is usually found 
there, walk.

The Temple, Chancery Lane, Serjeants' Inn, and Lincoln's Inn even 
unto the Fields are like tidal harbours at low water, where 
stranded proceedings, offices at anchor, idle clerks lounging on 
lop-sided stools that will not recover their perpendicular until 
the current of Term sets in, lie high and dry upon the ooze of the 
long vacation.  Outer doors of chambers are shut up by the score, 
messages and parcels are to be left at the Porter's Lodge by the 
bushel.  A crop of grass would grow in the chinks of the stone 
pavement outside Lincoln's Inn Hall, but that the ticket-porters, 
who have nothing to do beyond sitting in the shade there, with 
their white aprons over their heads to keep the flies off, grub it 
up and eat it thoughtfully.

There is only one judge in town.  Even he only comes twice a week 
to sit in chambers.  If the country folks of those assize towns on 
his circuit could see him now!  No full-bottomed wig, no red 
petticoats, no fur, no javelin-men, no white wands.  Merely a 
close-shaved gentleman in white trousers and a white hat, with sea-
bronze on the judicial countenance, and a strip of bark peeled by 
the solar rays from the judicial nose, who calls in at the shell-
fish shop as he comes along and drinks iced ginger-beer!

The bar of England is scattered over the face of the earth.  How 
England can get on through four long summer months without its bar
--which is its acknowledged refuge in adversity and its only 
legitimate triumph in prosperity--is beside the question; assuredly 
that shield and buckler of Britannia are not in present wear.  The 
learned gentleman who is always so tremendously indignant at the 
unprecedented outrage committed on the feelings of his client by 
the opposite party that he never seems likely to recover it is 
doing infinitely better than might be expected in Switzerland.  The 
learned gentleman who does the withering business and who blights 
all opponents with his gloomy sarcasm is as merry as a grig at a 
French watering-place.  The learned gentleman who weeps by the pint 
on the smallest provocation has not shed a tear these six weeks.  
The very learned gentleman who has cooled the natural heat of his 
gingery complexion in pools and fountains of law until he has 
become great in knotty arguments for term-time, when he poses the 
drowsy bench with legal "chaff," inexplicable to the uninitiated 
and to most of the initiated too, is roaming, with a characteristic 
delight in aridity and dust, about Constantinople.  Other dispersed 
fragments of the same great palladium are to be found on the canals 
of Venice, at the second cataract of the Nile, in the baths of 
Germany, and sprinkled on the sea-sand all over the English coast.  
Scarcely one is to be encountered in the deserted region of 
Chancery Lane.  If such a lonely member of the bar do flit across 
the waste and come upon a prowling suitor who is unable to leave 
off haunting the scenes of his anxiety, they frighten one another 
and retreat into opposite shades.

It is the hottest long vacation known for many years.  All the 
young clerks are madly in love, and according to their various 
degrees, pine for bliss with the beloved object, at Margate, 
Ramsgate, or Gravesend.  All the middle-aged clerks think their 
families too large.  All the unowned dogs who stray into the Inns 
of Court and pant about staircases and other dry places seeking 
water give short howls of aggravation.  All the blind men's dogs in 
the streets draw their masters against pumps or trip them over 
buckets.  A shop with a sun-blind, and a watered pavement, and a 
bowl of gold and silver fish in the window, is a sanctuary.  Temple 
Bar gets so hot that it is, to the adjacent Strand and Fleet 
Street, what a heater is in an urn, and keeps them simmering all 
night.

There are offices about the Inns of Court in which a man might be 
cool, if any coolness were worth purchasing at such a price in 
dullness; but the little thoroughfares immediately outside those 
retirements seem to blaze.  In Mr. Krook's court, it is so hot that 
the people turn their houses inside out and sit in chairs upon the 
pavement--Mr. Krook included, who there pursues his studies, with 
his cat (who never is too hot) by his side.  The Sol's Arms has 
discontinued the Harmonic Meetings for the season, and Little 
Swills is engaged at the Pastoral Gardens down the river, where he 
comes out in quite an innocent manner and sings comic ditties of a 
juvenile complexion calculated (as the bill says) not to wound the 
feelings of the most fastidious mind.

Over all the legal neighbourhood there hangs, like some great veil 
of rust or gigantic cobweb, the idleness and pensiveness of the 
long vacation.  Mr. Snagsby, law-stationer of Cook's Court, 
Cursitor Street, is sensible of the influence not only in his mind 
as a sympathetic and contemplative man, but also in his business as 
a law-stationer aforesaid.  He has more leisure for musing in 
Staple Inn and in the Rolls Yard during the long vacation than at 
other seasons, and he says to the two 'prentices, what a thing it 
is in such hot weather to think that you live in an island with the 
sea a-rolling and a-bowling right round you.

Guster is busy in the little drawing-room on this present afternoon 
in the long vacation, when Mr. and Mrs. Snagsby have it in 
contemplation to receive company.  The expected guests are rather 
select than numerous, being Mr. and Mrs. Chadband and no more.  
From Mr. Chadband's being much given to describe himself, both 
verbally and in writing, as a vessel, he is occasionally mistaken 
by strangers for a gentleman connected with navigation, but he is, 
as he expresses it, "in the ministry."  Mr. Chadband is attached to 
no particular denomination and is considered by his persecutors to 
have nothing so very remarkable to say on the greatest of subjects 
as to render his volunteering, on his own account, at all incumbent 
on his conscience; but he has his followers, and Mrs. Snagsby is of 
the number.  Mrs. Snagsby has but recently taken a passage upward 
by the vessel, Chadband; and her attention was attracted to that 
Bark A 1 when she was something flushed by the hot weather.

"My little woman," says Mr. Snagsby to the sparrows in Staple Inn, 
"likes to have her religion rather sharp, you see!"

So Guster, much impressed by regarding herself for the time as the 
handmaid of Chadband, whom she knows to be endowed with the gift of 
holding forth for four hours at a stretch, prepares the little 
drawing-room for tea.  All the furniture is shaken and dusted, the 
portraits of Mr. and Mrs. Snagsby are touched up with a wet cloth, 
the best tea-service is set forth, and there is excellent provision 
made of dainty new bread, crusty twists, cool fresh butter, thin 
slices of ham, tongue, and German sausage, and delicate little rows 
of anchovies nestling in parsley, not to mention new-laid eggs, to 
be brought up warm in a napkin, and hot buttered toast.  For 
Chadband is rather a consuming vessel--the persecutors say a 
gorging vessel--and can wield such weapons of the flesh as a knife 
and fork remarkably well.

Mr. Snagsby in his best coat, looking at all the preparations when 
they are completed and coughing his cough of deference behind his 
hand, says to Mrs. Snagsby, "At what time did you expect Mr. and 
Mrs. Chadband, my love?"

"At six," says Mrs. Snagsby.

Mr. Snagsby observes in a mild and casual way that "it's gone 
that."

"Perhaps you'd like to begin without them," is Mrs. Snagsby's 
reproachful remark.

Mr. Snagsby does look as if he would like it very much, but he 
says, with his cough of mildness, "No, my dear, no.  I merely named 
the time."

"What's time," says Mrs. Snagsby, "to eternity?"

"Very true, my dear," says Mr. Snagsby.  "Only when a person lays 
in victuals for tea, a person does it with a view--perhaps--more to 
time.  And when a time is named for having tea, it's better to come 
up to it."

"To come up to it!" Mrs. Snagsby repeats with severity.  "Up to it!  
As if Mr. Chadband was a fighter!"

"Not at all, my dear," says Mr. Snagsby.

Here, Guster, who had been looking out of the bedroom window, comes 
rustling and scratching down the little staircase like a popular 
ghost, and falling flushed into the drawing-room, announces that 
Mr. and Mrs. Chadband have appeared in the court.  The bell at the 
inner door in the passage immediately thereafter tinkling, she is 
admonished by Mrs. Snagsby, on pain of instant reconsignment to her 
patron saint, not to omit the ceremony of announcement.  Much 
discomposed in her nerves (which were previously in the best order) 
by this threat, she so fearfully mutilates that point of state as 
to announce "Mr. and Mrs. Cheeseming, least which, Imeantersay, 
whatsername!" and retires conscience-stricken from the presence.

Mr. Chadband is a large yellow man with a fat smile and a general 
appearance of having a good deal of train oil in his system.  Mrs. 
Chadband is a stern, severe-looking, silent woman.  Mr. Chadband 
moves softly and cumbrously, not unlike a bear who has been taught 
to walk upright.  He is very much embarrassed about the arms, as if 
they were inconvenient to him and he wanted to grovel, is very much 
in a perspiration about the head, and never speaks without first 
putting up his great hand, as delivering a token to his hearers 
that he is going to edify them.

"My friends," says Mr. Chadband, "peace be on this house!  On the 
master thereof, on the mistress thereof, on the young maidens, and 
on the young men!  My friends, why do I wish for peace?  What is 
peace?  Is it war?  No.  Is it strife?  No.  Is it lovely, and 
gentle, and beautiful, and pleasant, and serene, and joyful?  Oh, 
yes!  Therefore, my friends, I wish for peace, upon you and upon 
yours."

In consequence of Mrs. Snagsby looking deeply edified, Mr. Snagsby 
thinks it expedient on the whole to say amen, which is well 
received.

"Now, my friends," proceeds Mr. Chadband, "since I am upon this 
theme--"

Guster presents herself.  Mrs. Snagsby, in a spectral bass voice 
and without removing her eyes from Chadband, says with dreadful 
distinctness, "Go away!"

"Now, my friends," says Chadband, "since I am upon this theme, and 
in my lowly path improving it--"

Guster is heard unaccountably to murmur "one thousing seven hundred 
and eighty-two."  The spectral voice repeats more solemnly, "Go 
away!"

"Now, my friends," says Mr. Chadband, "we will inquire in a spirit 
of love--"

Still Guster reiterates "one thousing seven hundred and eighty-
two."

Mr. Chadband, pausing with the resignation of a man accustomed to 
be persecuted and languidly folding up his chin into his fat smile, 
says, "Let us hear the maiden!  Speak, maiden!"

"One thousing seven hundred and eighty-two, if you please, sir.  
Which he wish to know what the shilling ware for," says Guster, 
breathless.

"For?" returns Mrs. Chadband.  "For his fare!"

Guster replied that "he insistes on one and eightpence or on 
summonsizzing the party."  Mrs. Snagsby and Mrs. Chadband are 
proceeding to grow shrill in indignation when Mr. Chadband quiets 
the tumult by lifting up his hand.

"My friends," says he, "I remember a duty unfulfilled yesterday.  
It is right that I should be chastened in some penalty.  I ought 
not to murmur.  Rachael, pay the eightpence!"

While Mrs. Snagsby, drawing her breath, looks hard at Mr. Snagsby, 
as who should say, "You hear this apostle!" and while Mr. Chadband 
glows with humility and train oil, Mrs. Chadband pays the money.  
It is Mr. Chadband's habit--it is the head and front of his 
pretensions indeed--to keep this sort of debtor and creditor 
account in the smallest items and to post it publicly on the most 
trivial occasions.

"My friends," says Chadband, "eightpence is not much; it might 
justly have been one and fourpence; it might justly have been half 
a crown.  O let us be joyful, joyful!  O let us be joyful!"

With which remark, which appears from its sound to be an extract in 
verse, Mr. Chadband stalks to the table, and before taking a chair, 
lifts up his admonitory hand.

"My friends," says he, "what is this which we now behold as being 
spread before us?  Refreshment.  Do we need refreshment then, my 
friends?  We do.  And why do we need refreshment, my friends?  
Because we are but mortal, because we are but sinful, because we 
are but of the earth, because we are not of the air.  Can we fly, 
my friends?  We cannot.  Why can we not fly, my friends?"

Mr. Snagsby, presuming on the success of his last point, ventures 
to observe in a cheerful and rather knowing tone, "No wings."  But 
is immediately frowned down by Mrs. Snagsby.

"I say, my friends," pursues Mr. Chadband, utterly rejecting and 
obliterating Mr. Snagsby's suggestion, "why can we not fly?  Is it 
because we are calculated to walk?  It is.  Could we walk, my 
friends, without strength?  We could not.  What should we do 
without strength, my friends?  Our legs would refuse to bear us, 
our knees would double up, our ankles would turn over, and we 
should come to the ground.  Then from whence, my friends, in a 
human point of view, do we derive the strength that is necessary to 
our limbs?  Is it," says Chadband, glancing over the table, "from 
bread in various forms, from butter which is churned from the milk 
which is yielded unto us by the cow, from the eggs which are laid 
by the fowl, from ham, from tongue, from sausage, and from such 
like?  It is.  Then let us partake of the good things which are set 
before us!"

The persecutors denied that there was any particular gift in Mr. 
Chadband's piling verbose flights of stairs, one upon another, 
after this fashion.  But this can only be received as a proof of 
their determination to persecute, since it must be within 
everybody's experience that the Chadband style of oratory is widely 
received and much admired.

Mr. Chadband, however, having concluded for the present, sits down 
at Mr. Snagsby's table and lays about him prodigiously.  The 
conversion of nutriment of any sort into oil of the quality already 
mentioned appears to be a process so inseparable from the 
constitution of this exemplary vessel that in beginning to eat and 
drink, he may be described as always becoming a kind of 
considerable oil mills or other large factory for the production of 
that article on a wholesale scale.  On the present evening of the 
long vacation, in Cook's Court, Cursitor Street, he does such a 
powerful stroke of business that the warehouse appears to be quite 
full when the works cease.

At this period of the entertainment, Guster, who has never 
recovered her first failure, but has neglected no possible or 
impossible means of bringing the establishment and herself into 
contempt--among which may be briefly enumerated her unexpectedly 
performing clashing military music on Mr. Chadband's head with 
plates, and afterwards crowning that gentleman with muffins--at 
which period of the entertainment, Guster whispers Mr. Snagsby that 
he is wanted.

"And being wanted in the--not to put too fine a point upon it--in 
the shop," says Mr. Snagsby, rising, "perhaps this good company 
will excuse me for half a minute."

Mr. Snagsby descends and finds the two 'prentices intently 
contemplating a police constable, who holds a ragged boy by the 
arm.

"Why, bless my heart," says Mr. Snagsby, "what's the matter!"

"This boy," says the constable, "although he's repeatedly told to, 
won't move on--"

"I'm always a-moving on, sar, cries the boy, wiping away his grimy 
tears with his arm.  "I've always been a-moving and a-moving on, 
ever since I was born.  Where can I possibly move to, sir, more nor 
I do move!"

"He won't move on," says the constable calmly, with a slight 
professional hitch of his neck involving its better settlement in 
his stiff stock, "although he has been repeatedly cautioned, and 
therefore I am obliged to take him into custody.  He's as obstinate 
a young gonoph as I know.  He WON'T move on."

"Oh, my eye!  Where can I move to!" cries the boy, clutching quite 
desperately at his hair and beating his bare feet upon the floor of 
Mr. Snagsby's passage.

"Don't you come none of that or I shall make blessed short work of 
you!" says the constable, giving him a passionless shake.  "My 
instructions are that you are to move on.  I have told you so five 
hundred times."

"But where?" cries the boy.

"Well!  Really, constable, you know," says Mr. Snagsby wistfully, 
and coughing behind his hand his cough of great perplexity and 
doubt, "really, that does seem a question.  Where, you know?"

"My instructions don't go to that," replies the constable.  "My 
instructions are that this boy is to move on."

Do you hear, Jo?  It is nothing to you or to any one else that the 
great lights of the parliamentary sky have failed for some few 
years in this business to set you the example of moving on.  The 
one grand recipe remains for you--the profound philosophical 
prescription--the be-all and the end-all of your strange existence 
upon earth.  Move on!  You are by no means to move off, Jo, for the 
great lights can't at all agree about that.  Move on!

Mr. Snagsby says nothing to this effect, says nothing at all 
indeed, but coughs his forlornest cough, expressive of no 
thoroughfare in any direction.  By this time Mr. and Mrs. Chadband 
and Mrs. Snagsby, hearing the altercation, have appeared upon the 
stairs.  Guster having never left the end of the passage, the whole 
household are assembled.

"The simple question is, sir," says the constable, "whether you 
know this boy.  He says you do."

Mrs. Snagsby, from her elevation, instantly cries out, "No he 
don't!"

"My lit-tle woman!" says Mr. Snagsby, looking up the staircase.  
"My love, permit me!  Pray have a moment's patience, my dear.  I do 
know something of this lad, and in what I know of him, I can't say 
that there's any harm; perhaps on the contrary, constable."  To 
whom the law-stationer relates his Joful and woful experience, 
suppressing the half-crown fact.

"Well!" says the constable, "so far, it seems, he had grounds for 
what he said.  When I took him into custody up in Holborn, he said 
you knew him.  Upon that, a young man who was in the crowd said he 
was acquainted with you, and you were a respectable housekeeper, 
and if I'd call and make the inquiry, he'd appear.  The young man 
don't seem inclined to keep his word, but--  Oh! Here IS the young 
man!"

Enter Mr. Guppy, who nods to Mr. Snagsby and touches his hat with 
the chivalry of clerkship to the ladies on the stairs.

"I was strolling away from the office just now when I found this 
row going on," says Mr. Guppy to the law-stationer, "and as your 
name was mentioned, I thought it was right the thing should be 
looked into."

"It was very good-natured of you, sir," says Mr. Snagsby, "and I am 
obliged to you."  And Mr. Snagsby again relates his experience, 
again suppressing the half-crown fact.

"Now, I know where you live," says the constable, then, to Jo.  
"You live down in Tom-all-Alone's.  That's a nice innocent place to 
live in, ain't it?"

"I can't go and live in no nicer place, sir," replies Jo.  "They 
wouldn't have nothink to say to me if I wos to go to a nice 
innocent place fur to live.  Who ud go and let a nice innocent 
lodging to such a reg'lar one as me!"

"You are very poor, ain't you?" says the constable.

"Yes, I am indeed, sir, wery poor in gin'ral," replies Jo.  "I 
leave you to judge now!  I shook these two half-crowns out of him," 
says the constable, producing them to the company, "in only putting 
my hand upon him!"

"They're wot's left, Mr. Snagsby," says Jo, "out of a sov-ring as 
wos give me by a lady in a wale as sed she wos a servant and as 
come to my crossin one night and asked to be showd this 'ere ouse 
and the ouse wot him as you giv the writin to died at, and the 
berrin-ground wot he's berrid in.  She ses to me she ses 'are you 
the boy at the inkwhich?' she ses.  I ses 'yes' I ses.  She ses to 
me she ses 'can you show me all them places?'  I ses 'yes I can' I 
ses.  And she ses to me 'do it' and I dun it and she giv me a 
sov'ring and hooked it.  And I an't had much of the sov'ring 
neither," says Jo, with dirty tears, "fur I had to pay five bob, 
down in Tom-all-Alone's, afore they'd square it fur to give me 
change, and then a young man he thieved another five while I was 
asleep and another boy he thieved ninepence and the landlord he 
stood drains round with a lot more on it."

"You don't expect anybody to believe this, about the lady and the 
sovereign, do you?" says the constable, eyeing him aside with 
ineffable disdain.

"I don't know as I do, sir," replies Jo.  "I don't expect nothink 
at all, sir, much, but that's the true hist'ry on it."

"You see what he is!" the constable observes to the audience.  
"Well, Mr. Snagsby, if I don't lock him up this time, will you 
engage for his moving on?"

"No!" cries Mrs. Snagsby from the stairs.

"My little woman!" pleads her husband.  "Constable, I have no doubt 
he'll move on.  You know you really must do it," says Mr. Snagsby.

"I'm everyways agreeable, sir," says the hapless Jo.

"Do it, then," observes the constable.  "You know what you have got 
to do.  Do it!  And recollect you won't get off so easy next time.  
Catch hold of your money.  Now, the sooner you're five mile off, 
the better for all parties."

With this farewell hint and pointing generally to the setting sun 
as a likely place to move on to, the constable bids his auditors 
good afternoon and makes the echoes of Cook's Court perform slow 
music for him as he walks away on the shady side, carrying his 
iron-bound hat in his hand for a little ventilation.

Now, Jo's improbable story concerning the lady and the sovereign 
has awakened more or less the curiosity of all the company.  Mr. 
Guppy, who has an inquiring mind in matters of evidence and who has 
been suffering severely from the lassitude of the long vacation, 
takes that interest in the case that he enters on a regular cross-
examination of the witness, which is found so interesting by the 
ladies that Mrs. Snagsby politely invites him to step upstairs and 
drink a cup of tea, if he will excuse the disarranged state of the 
tea-table, consequent on their previous exertions.  Mr. Guppy 
yielding his assent to this proposal, Jo is requested to follow 
into the drawing-room doorway, where Mr. Guppy takes him in hand as 
a witness, patting him into this shape, that shape, and the other 
shape like a butterman dealing with so much butter, and worrying 
him according to the best models.  Nor is the examination unlike 
many such model displays, both in respect of its eliciting nothing 
and of its being lengthy, for Mr. Guppy is sensible of his talent, 
and Mrs. Snagsby feels not only that it gratifies her inquisitive 
disposition, but that it lifts her husband's establishment higher 
up in the law.  During the progress of this keen encounter, the 
vessel Chadband, being merely engaged in the oil trade, gets 
aground and waits to be floated off.

"Well!" says Mr. Guppy.  "Either this boy sticks to it like 
cobbler's-wax or there is something out of the common here that 
beats anything that ever came into my way at Kenge and Carboy's."

Mrs. Chadband whispers Mrs. Snagsby, who exclaims, "You don't say 
so!"

"For years!" replied Mrs. Chadband.

"Has known Kenge and Carboy's office for years," Mrs. Snagsby 
triumphantly explains to Mr. Guppy.  "Mrs. Chadband--this 
gentleman's wife--Reverend Mr. Chadband."

"Oh, indeed!" says Mr. Guppy.

"Before I married my present husband," says Mrs. Chadband.

"Was you a party in anything, ma'am?" says Mr. Guppy, transferring 
his cross-examination.

"No."

"NOT a party in anything, ma'am?" says Mr. Guppy.

Mrs. Chadband shakes her head.

"Perhaps you were acquainted with somebody who was a party in 
something, ma'am?" says Mr. Guppy, who likes nothing better than to 
model his conversation on forensic principles.

"Not exactly that, either," replies Mrs. Chadband, humouring the 
joke with a hard-favoured smile.

"Not exactly that, either!" repeats Mr. Guppy.  "Very good.  Pray, 
ma'am, was it a lady of your acquaintance who had some transactions 
(we will not at present say what transactions) with Kenge and 
Carboy's office, or was it a gentleman of your acquaintance?  Take 
time, ma'am.  We shall come to it presently.  Man or woman, ma'am?"

"Neither," says Mrs. Chadband as before.

"Oh!  A child!" says Mr. Guppy, throwing on the admiring Mrs. 
Snagsby the regular acute professional eye which is thrown on 
British jurymen.  "Now, ma'am, perhaps you'll have the kindness to 
tell us WHAT child."

"You have got it at last, sir," says Mrs. Chadband with another 
hard-favoured smile.  "Well, sir, it was before your time, most 
likely, judging from your appearance.  I was left in charge of a 
child named Esther Summerson, who was put out in life by Messrs. 
Kenge and Carboy."

"Miss Summerson, ma'am!" cries Mr. Guppy, excited.

"I call her Esther Summerson," says Mrs. Chadband with austerity.  
"There was no Miss-ing of the girl in my time.  It was Esther.  
'Esther, do this!  Esther, do that!' and she was made to do it."

"My dear ma'am," returns Mr. Guppy, moving across the small 
apartment, "the humble individual who now addresses you received 
that young lady in London when she first came here from the 
establishment to which you have alluded.  Allow me to have the 
pleasure of taking you by the hand."

Mr. Chadband, at last seeing his opportunity, makes his accustomed 
signal and rises with a smoking head, which he dabs with his 
pocket-handkerchief.  Mrs. Snagsby whispers "Hush!"

"My friends," says Chadband, "we have partaken in moderation" 
(which was certainly not the case so far as he was concerned) "of 
the comforts which have been provided for us.  May this house live 
upon the fatness of the land; may corn and wine be plentiful 
therein; may it grow, may it thrive, may it prosper, may it 
advance, may it proceed, may it press forward!  But, my friends, 
have we partaken of any-hing else?  We have.  My friends, of what 
else have we partaken?  Of spiritual profit?  Yes.  From whence 
have we derived that spiritual profit?  My young friend, stand 
forth!"

Jo, thus apostrophized, gives a slouch backward, and another slouch 
forward, and another slouch to each side, and confronts the 
eloquent Chadband with evident doubts of his intentions.

"My young friend," says Chadband, "you are to us a pearl, you are 
to us a diamond, you are to us a gem, you are to us a jewel.  And 
why, my young friend?"

"I don't know," replies Jo.  "I don't know nothink."

"My young friend," says Chadband, "it is because you know nothing 
that you are to us a gem and jewel.  For what are you, my young 
friend?  Are you a beast of the field?  No.  A bird of the air?  
No.  A fish of the sea or river?  No.  You are a human boy, my 
young friend.  A human boy.  O glorious to be a human boy!  And why 
glorious, my young friend?  Because you are capable of receiving 
the lessons of wisdom, because you are capable of profiting by this 
discourse which I now deliver for your good, because you are not a 
stick, or a staff, or a stock, or a stone, or a post, or a pillar.


     O running stream of sparkling joy
     To be a soaring human boy!


And do you cool yourself in that stream now, my young friend?  No.  
Why do you not cool yourself in that stream now?  Because you are 
in a state of darkness, because you are in a state of obscurity, 
because you are in a state of sinfulness, because you are in a 
state of bondage.  My young friend, what is bondage?  Let us, in a 
spirit of love, inquire."

At this threatening stage of the discourse, Jo, who seems to have 
been gradually going out of his mind, smears his right arm over his 
face and gives a terrible yawn.  Mrs. Snagsby indignantly expresses 
her belief that he is a limb of the arch-fiend.

"My friends," says Mr. Chadband with his persecuted chin folding 
itself into its fat smile again as he looks round, "it is right 
that I should be humbled, it is right that I should be tried, it is 
right that I should be mortified, it is right that I should be 
corrected.  I stumbled, on Sabbath last, when I thought with pride 
of my three hours' improving.  The account is now favourably 
balanced: my creditor has accepted a composition.  O let us be 
joyful, joyful!  O let us be joyful!"

Great sensation on the part of Mrs. Snagsby.

"My friends," says Chadband, looking round him in conclusion, "I 
will not proceed with my young friend now.  Will you come to-
morrow, my young friend, and inquire of this good lady where I am 
to be found to deliver a discourse unto you, and will you come like 
the thirsty swallow upon the next day, and upon the day after that, 
and upon the day after that, and upon many pleasant days, to hear 
discourses?"  (This with a cow-like lightness.)

Jo, whose immediate object seems to be to get away on any terms, 
gives a shuffling nod.  Mr. Guppy then throws him a penny, and Mrs. 
Snagsby calls to Guster to see him safely out of the house.  But 
before he goes downstairs, Mr. Snagsby loads him with some broken 
meats from the table, which he carries away, hugging in his arms.

So, Mr. Chadband--of whom the persecutors say that it is no wonder 
he should go on for any length of time uttering such abominable 
nonsense, but that the wonder rather is that he should ever leave 
off, having once the audacity to begin--retires into private life 
until he invests a little capital of supper in the oil-trade.  Jo 
moves on, through the long vacation, down to Blackfriars Bridge, 
where he finds a baking stony corner wherein to settle to his 
repast.

And there he sits, munching and gnawing, and looking up at the 
great cross on the summit of St. Paul's Cathedral, glittering above 
a red-and-violet-tinted cloud of smoke.  From the boy's face one 
might suppose that sacred emblem to be, in his eyes, the crowning 
confusion of the great, confused city--so golden, so high up, so 
far out of his reach.  There he sits, the sun going down, the river 
running fast, the crowd flowing by him in two streams--everything 
moving on to some purpose and to one end--until he is stirred up 
and told to "move on" too.



CHAPTER XX

A New Lodger


The long vacation saunters on towards term-time like an idle river 
very leisurely strolling down a flat country to the sea.  Mr. Guppy 
saunters along with it congenially.  He has blunted the blade of 
his penknife and broken the point off by sticking that instrument 
into his desk in every direction.  Not that he bears the desk any 
ill will, but he must do something, and it must be something of an 
unexciting nature, which will lay neither his physical nor his 
intellectual energies under too heavy contribution.  He finds that 
nothing agrees with him so well as to make little gyrations on one 
leg of his stool, and stab his desk, and gape.

Kenge and Carboy are out of town, and the articled clerk has taken 
out a shooting license and gone down to his father's, and Mr. 
Guppy's two fellow-stipendiaries are away on leave.  Mr. Guppy and 
Mr. Richard Carstone divide the dignity of the office.  But Mr. 
Carstone is for the time being established in Kenge's room, whereat 
Mr. Guppy chafes.  So exceedingly that he with biting sarcasm 
informs his mother, in the confidential moments when he sups with 
her off a lobster and lettuce in the Old Street Road, that he is 
afraid the office is hardly good enough for swells, and that if he 
had known there was a swell coming, he would have got it painted.

Mr. Guppy suspects everybody who enters on the occupation of a 
stool in Kenge and Carboy's office of entertaining, as a matter of 
course, sinister designs upon him.  He is clear that every such 
person wants to depose him.  If he be ever asked how, why, when, or 
wherefore, he shuts up one eye and shakes his head.  On the 
strength of these profound views, he in the most ingenious manner 
takes infinite pains to counterplot when there is no plot, and 
plays the deepest games of chess without any adversary.

It is a source of much gratification to Mr. Guppy, therefore, to 
find the new-comer constantly poring over the papers in Jarndyce 
and Jarndyce, for he well knows that nothing but confusion and 
failure can come of that.  His satisfaction communicates itself to 
a third saunterer through the long vacation in Kenge and Carboy's 
office, to wit, Young Smallweed.

Whether Young Smallweed (metaphorically called Small and eke Chick 
Weed, as it were jocularly to express a fledgling) was ever a boy 
is much doubted in Lincoln's Inn.  He is now something under 
fifteen and an old limb of the law.  He is facetiously understood 
to entertain a passion for a lady at a cigar-shop in the 
neighbourhood of Chancery Lane and for her sake to have broken off 
a contract with another lady, to whom he had been engaged some 
years.  He is a town-made article, of small stature and weazen 
features, but may be perceived from a considerable distance by 
means of his very tall hat.  To become a Guppy is the object of his 
ambition.  He dresses at that gentleman (by whom he is patronized), 
talks at him, walks at him, founds himself entirely on him.  He is 
honoured with Mr. Guppy's particular confidence and occasionally 
advises him, from the deep wells of his experience, on difficult 
points in private life.

Mr. Guppy has been lolling out of window all the morning after 
trying all the stools in succession and finding none of them easy, 
and after several times putting his head into the iron safe with a 
notion of cooling it.  Mr. Smallweed has been twice dispatched for 
effervescent drinks, and has twice mixed them in the two official 
tumblers and stirred them up with the ruler.  Mr. Guppy propounds 
for Mr. Smallweed's consideration the paradox that the more you 
drink the thirstier you are and reclines his head upon the window-
sill in a state of hopeless languor.

While thus looking out into the shade of Old Square, Lincoln's Inn, 
surveying the intolerable bricks and mortar, Mr. Guppy becomes 
conscious of a manly whisker emerging from the cloistered walk 
below and turning itself up in the direction of his face.  At the 
same time, a low whistle is wafted through the Inn and a suppressed 
voice cries, "Hip!  Gup-py!"

"Why, you don't mean it!" says Mr. Guppy, aroused.  "Small!  Here's 
Jobling!"  Small's head looks out of window too and nods to 
Jobling.

"Where have you sprung up from?" inquires Mr. Guppy.

"From the market-gardens down by Deptford.  I can't stand it any 
longer.  I must enlist.  I say!  I wish you'd lend me half a crown.  
Upon my soul, I'm hungry."

Jobling looks hungry and also has the appearance of having run to 
seed in the market-gardens down by Deptford.

"I say!  Just throw out half a crown if you have got one to spare.  
I want to get some dinner."

"Will you come and dine with me?" says Mr. Guppy, throwing out the 
coin, which Mr. Jobling catches neatly.

"How long should I have to hold out?" says Jobling.

"Not half an hour.  I am only waiting here till the enemy goes, 
returns Mr. Guppy, butting inward with his head.

"What enemy?"

"A new one.  Going to be articled.  Will you wait?"

"Can you give a fellow anything to read in the meantime?" says Mr 
Jobling.

Smallweed suggests the law list.  But Mr. Jobling declares with 
much earnestness that he "can't stand it."

"You shall have the paper," says Mr. Guppy.  "He shall bring it 
down.  But you had better not be seen about here.  Sit on our 
staircase and read.  It's a quiet place."

Jobling nods intelligence and acquiescence.  The sagacious 
Smallweed supplies him with the newspaper and occasionally drops 
his eye upon him from the landing as a precaution against his 
becoming disgusted with waiting and making an untimely departure.  
At last the enemy retreats, and then Smallweed fetches Mr. Jobling 
up.

"Well, and how are you?" says Mr. Guppy, shaking hands with him.

"So, so.  How are you?"

Mr. Guppy replying that he is not much to boast of, Mr. Jobling 
ventures on the question, "How is SHE?"  This Mr. Guppy resents as 
a liberty, retorting, "Jobling, there ARE chords in the human 
mind--"  Jobling begs pardon.

"Any subject but that!" says Mr. Guppy with a gloomy enjoyment of 
his injury.  "For there ARE chords, Jobling--"

Mr. Jobling begs pardon again.

During this short colloquy, the active Smallweed, who is of the 
dinner party, has written in legal characters on a slip of paper, 
"Return immediately."  This notification to all whom it may 
concern, he inserts in the letter-box, and then putting on the tall 
hat at the angle of inclination at which Mr. Guppy wears his, 
informs his patron that they may now make themselves scarce.

Accordingly they betake themselves to a neighbouring dining-house, 
of the class known among its frequenters by the denomination slap-
bang, where the waitress, a bouncing young female of forty, is 
supposed to have made some impression on the susceptible Smallweed, 
of whom it may be remarked that he is a weird changeling to whom 
years are nothing.  He stands precociously possessed of centuries 
of owlish wisdom.  If he ever lay in a cradle, it seems as if he 
must have lain there in a tail-coat.  He has an old, old eye, has 
Smallweed; and he drinks and smokes in a monkeyish way; and his 
neck is stiff in his collar; and he is never to be taken in; and he 
knows all about it, whatever it is.  In short, in his bringing up 
he has been so nursed by Law and Equity that he has become a kind 
of fossil imp, to account for whose terrestrial existence it is 
reported at the public offices that his father was John Doe and his 
mother the only female member of the Roe family, also that his 
first long-clothes were made from a blue bag.

Into the dining-house, unaffected by the seductive show in the 
window of artificially whitened cauliflowers and poultry, verdant 
baskets of peas, coolly blooming cucumbers, and joints ready for 
the spit, Mr. Smallweed leads the way.  They know him there and 
defer to him.  He has his favourite box, he bespeaks all the 
papers, he is down upon bald patriarchs, who keep them more than 
ten minutes afterwards.  It is of no use trying him with anything 
less than a full-sized "bread" or proposing to him any joint in cut 
unless it is in the very best cut.  In the matter of gravy he is 
adamant.

Conscious of his elfin power and submitting to his dread 
experience, Mr. Guppy consults him in the choice of that day's 
banquet, turning an appealing look towards him as the waitress 
repeats the catalogue of viands and saying "What do YOU take, 
Chick?"  Chick, out of the profundity of his artfulness, preferring 
"veal and ham and French beans--and don't you forget the stuffing, 
Polly" (with an unearthly cock of his venerable eye), Mr. Guppy and 
Mr. Jobling give the like order.  Three pint pots of half-and-half 
are superadded.  Quickly the waitress returns bearing what is 
apparently a model of the Tower of Babel but what is really a pile 
of plates and flat tin dish-covers.  Mr. Smallweed, approving of 
what is set before him, conveys intelligent benignity into his 
ancient eye and winks upon her.  Then, amid a constant coming in, 
and going out, and running about, and a clatter of crockery, and a 
rumbling up and down of the machine which brings the nice cuts from 
the kitchen, and a shrill crying for more nice cuts down the 
speaking-pipe, and a shrill reckoning of the cost of nice cuts that 
have been disposed of, and a general flush and steam of hot joints, 
cut and uncut, and a considerably heated atmosphere in which the 
soiled knives and tablecloths seem to break out spontaneously into 
eruptions of grease and blotches of beer, the legal triumvirate 
appease their appetites.

Mr. Jobling is buttoned up closer than mere adornment might 
require.  His hat presents at the rims a peculiar appearance of a 
glistening nature, as if it had been a favourite snail-promenade.  
The same phenomenon is visible on some parts of his coat, and 
particularly at the seams.  He has the faded appearance of a 
gentleman in embarrassed circumstances; even his light whiskers 
droop with something of a shabby air.

His appetite is so vigorous that it suggests spare living for some 
little time back.  He makes such a speedy end of his plate of veal 
and ham, bringing it to a close while his companions are yet midway 
in theirs, that Mr. Guppy proposes another.  "Thank you, Guppy," 
says Mr. Jobling, "I really don't know but what I WILL take 
another."

Another being brought, he falls to with great goodwill.

Mr. Guppy takes silent notice of him at intervals until he is half 
way through this second plate and stops to take an enjoying pull at 
his pint pot of half-and-half (also renewed) and stretches out his 
legs and rubs his hands.  Beholding him in which glow of 
contentment, Mr. Guppy says, "You are a man again, Tony!"

"Well, not quite yet," says Mr. Jobling.  "Say, just born."

"Will you take any other vegetables?  Grass?  Peas?  Summer 
cabbage?"

"Thank you, Guppy," says Mr. Jobling.  "I really don't know but 
what I WILL take summer cabbage."

Order given; with the sarcastic addition (from Mr. Smallweed) of 
"Without slugs, Polly!"  And cabbage produced.

"I am growing up, Guppy," says Mr. Jobling, plying his knife and 
fork with a relishing steadiness.

"Glad to hear it."

"In fact, I have just turned into my teens," says Mr. Jobling.

He says no more until he has performed his task, which he achieves 
as Messrs. Guppy and Smallweed finish theirs, thus getting over the 
ground in excellent style and beating those two gentlemen easily by 
a veal and ham and a cabbage.

"Now, Small," says Mr. Guppy, "what would you recommend about 
pastry?"

"Marrow puddings," says Mr. Smallweed instantly.

"Aye, aye!" cries Mr. Jobling with an arch look.  "You're there, 
are you?  Thank you, Mr. Guppy, I don't know but what I WILL take a 
marrow pudding."

Three marrow puddings being produced, Mr. Jobling adds in a 
pleasant humour that he is coming of age fast.  To these succeed, 
by command of Mr. Smallweed, "three Cheshires," and to those "three 
small rums."  This apex of the entertainment happily reached, Mr. 
Jobling puts up his legs on the carpeted seat (having his own side 
of the box to himself), leans against the wall, and says, "I am 
grown up now, Guppy.  I have arrived at maturity."

"What do you think, now," says Mr. Guppy, "about--you don't mind 
Smallweed?"

"Not the least in the worid.  I have the pleasure of drinking his 
good health."

"Sir, to you!" says Mr. Smallweed.

"I was saying, what do you think NOW," pursues Mr. Guppy, "of 
enlisting?"

"Why, what I may think after dinner," returns Mr. Jobling, "is one 
thing, my dear Guppy, and what I may think before dinner is another 
thing.  Still, even after dinner, I ask myself the question, What 
am I to do?  How am I to live?  Ill fo manger, you know," says Mr. 
Jobling, pronouncing that word as if he meant a necessary fixture 
in an English stable.  "Ill fo manger.  That's the French saying, 
and mangering is as necessary to me as it is to a Frenchman.  Or 
more so."

Mr. Smallweed is decidedly of opinion "much more so."

"If any man had told me," pursues Jobling, "even so lately as when 
you and I had the frisk down in Lincolnshire, Guppy, and drove over 
to see that house at Castle Wold--"

Mr. Smallweed corrects him--Chesney Wold.

"Chesney Wold.  (I thank my honourable friend for that cheer.) If 
any man had told me then that I should be as hard up at the present 
time as I literally find myself, I should have--well, I should have 
pitched into him," says Mr. Jobling, taking a little rum-and-water 
with an air of desperate resignation; "I should have let fly at his 
head."

"Still, Tony, you were on the wrong side of the post then," 
remonstrates Mr. Guppy.  "You were talking about nothing else in 
the gig."

"Guppy," says Mr. Jobling, "I will not deny it.  I was on the wrong 
side of the post.  But I trusted to things coming round."

That very popular trust in flat things coming round!  Not in their 
being beaten round, or worked round, but in their "coming" round!  
As though a lunatic should trust in the world's "coming" 
triangular!

"I had confident expectations that things would come round and be 
all square," says Mr. Jobling with some vagueness of expression and 
perhaps of meaning too.  "But I was disappointed.  They never did.  
And when it came to creditors making rows at the office and to 
people that the office dealt with making complaints about dirty 
trifles of borrowed money, why there was an end of that connexion.  
And of any new professional connexion too, for if I was to give a 
reference to-morrow, it would be mentioned and would sew me up.  
Then what's a fellow to do?  I have been keeping out of the way and 
living cheap down about the market-gardens, but what's the use of 
living cheap when you have got no money?  You might as well live 
dear."

"Better," Mr. Smallweed thinks.

"Certainly.  It's the fashionable way; and fashion and whiskers 
have been my weaknesses, and I don't care who knows it," says Mr. 
Jobling.  "They are great weaknesses--Damme, sir, they are great.  
Well," proceeds Mr. Jobling after a defiant visit to his rum-and-
water, "what can a fellow do, I ask you, BUT enlist?"

Mr. Guppy comes more fully into the conversation to state what, in 
his opinion, a fellow can do.  His manner is the gravely impressive 
manner of a man who has not committed himself in life otherwise 
than as he has become the victim of a tender sorrow of the heart.

"Jobling," says Mr. Guppy, "myself and our mutual friend Smallweed--"

Mr. Smallweed modestly observes, "Gentlemen both!" and drinks.

"--Have had a little conversation on this matter more than once 
since you--"

"Say, got the sack!" cries Mr. Jobling bitterly.  "Say it, Guppy.  
You mean it."

"No-o-o!  Left the Inn," Mr. Smallweed delicately suggests.

"Since you left the Inn, Jobling," says Mr. Guppy; "and I have 
mentioned to our mutual friend Smallweed a plan I have lately 
thought of proposing.  You know Snagsby the stationer?"

"I know there is such a stationer," returns Mr. Jobling.  "He was 
not ours, and I am not acquainted with him."

"He IS ours, Jobling, and I AM acquainted with him," Mr. Guppy 
retorts.  "Well, sir!  I have lately become better acquainted with 
him through some accidental circumstances that have made me a 
visitor of his in private life.  Those circumstances it is not 
necessary to offer in argument.  They may--or they may not--have 
some reference to a subject which may--or may not--have cast its 
shadow on my existence."

As it is Mr. Guppy's perplexing way with boastful misery to tempt 
his particular friends into this subject, and the moment they touch 
it, to turn on them with that trenchant severity about the chords 
in the human mind, both Mr. Jobling and Mr. Smallweed decline the 
pitfall by remaining silent.

"Such things may be," repeats Mr. Guppy, "or they may not be.  They 
are no part of the case.  It is enough to mention that both Mr. and 
Mrs. Snagsby are very willing to oblige me and that Snagsby has, in 
busy times, a good deal of copying work to give out.  He has all 
Tulkinghorn's, and an excellent business besides.  I believe if our 
mutual friend Smallweed were put into the box, he could prove 
this?"

Mr. Smallweed nods and appears greedy to be sworn.

"Now, gentlemen of the jury," says Mr. Guppy, "--I mean, now, 
Jobling--you may say this is a poor prospect of a living.  Granted.  
But it's better than nothing, and better than enlistment.  You want 
time.  There must be time for these late affairs to blow over.  You 
might live through it on much worse terms than by writing for 
Snagsby."

Mr. Jobling is about to interrupt when the sagacious Smallweed 
checks him with a dry cough and the words, "Hem!  Shakspeare!"

"There are two branches to this subject, Jobling," says Mr. Guppy.  
"That is the first.  I come to the second.  You know Krook, the 
Chancellor, across the lane.  Come, Jobling," says Mr. Guppy in his 
encouraging cross-examination-tone, "I think you know Krook, the 
Chancellor, across the lane?"

"I know him by sight," says Mr. Jobling.

"You know him by sight.  Very well.  And you know little Flite?"

"Everybody knows her," says Mr. Jobling.

"Everybody knows her.  VERY well.  Now it has been one of my duties 
of late to pay Flite a certain weekly allowance, deducting from it 
the amount of her weekly rent, which I have paid (in consequence of 
instructions I have received) to Krook himself, regularly in her 
presence.  This has brought me into communication with Krook and 
into a knowledge of his house and his habits.  I know he has a room 
to let.  You may live there at a very low charge under any name you 
like, as quietly as if you were a hundred miles off.  He'll ask no 
questions and would accept you as a tenant at a word from me--
before the clock strikes, if you chose.  And I tell you another 
thing, Jobling," says Mr. Guppy, who has suddenly lowered his voice 
and become familiar again, "he's an extraordinary old chap--always 
rummaging among a litter of papers and grubbing away at teaching 
himself to read and write, without getting on a bit, as it seems to 
me.  He is a most extraordinary old chap, sir.  I don't know but 
what it might be worth a fellow's while to look him up a bit."

"You don't mean--" Mr. Jobling begins.

"I mean," returns Mr. Guppy, shrugging his shoulders with becoming 
modesty, "that I can't make him out.  I appeal to our mutual friend 
Smallweed whether he has or has not heard me remark that I can't 
make him out."

Mr. Smallweed bears the concise testimony, "A few!"

"I have seen something of the profession and something of life, 
Tony," says Mr. Guppy, "and it's seldom I can't make a man out, 
more or less.  But such an old card as this, so deep, so sly, and 
secret (though I don't believe he is ever sober), I never came 
across.  Now, he must be precious old, you know, and he has not a 
soul about him, and he is reported to be immensely rich; and 
whether he is a smuggler, or a receiver, or an unlicensed 
pawnbroker, or a money-lender--all of which I have thought likely 
at different times--it might pay you to knock up a sort of 
knowledge of him.  I don't see why you shouldn't go in for it, when 
everything else suits."

Mr. Jobling, Mr. Guppy, and Mr. Smallweed all lean their elbows on 
the table and their chins upon their hands, and look at the 
ceiling.  After a time, they all drink, slowly lean back, put their 
hands in their pockets, and look at one another.

"If I had the energy I once possessed, Tony!" says Mr. Guppy with a 
sigh.  "But there are chords in the human mind--"

Expressing the remainder of the desolate sentiment in rum-and-
water, Mr. Guppy concludes by resigning the adventure to Tony 
Jobling and informing him that during the vacation and while things 
are slack, his purse, "as far as three or four or even five pound 
goes," will be at his disposal.  "For never shall it be said," Mr. 
Guppy adds with emphasis, "that William Guppy turned his back upon 
his friend!"

The latter part of the proposal is so directly to the purpose that 
Mr. Jobling says with emotion, "Guppy, my trump, your fist!"  Mr. 
Guppy presents it, saying, "Jobling, my boy, there it is!"  Mr. 
Jobling returns, "Guppy, we have been pals now for some years!"  
Mr. Guppy replies, "Jobling, we have."

They then shake hands, and Mr. Jobling adds in a feeling manner, 
"Thank you, Guppy, I don't know but what I WILL take another glass 
for old acquaintance sake."

"Krook's last lodger died there," observes Mr. Guppy in an 
incidental way.

"Did he though!" says Mr. Jobling.

"There was a verdict.  Accidental death.  You don't mind that?"

"No," says Mr. Jobling, "I don't mind it; but he might as well have 
died somewhere else.  It's devilish odd that he need go and die at 
MY place!"  Mr. Jobling quite resents this liberty, several times 
returning to it with such remarks as, "There are places enough to 
die in, I should think!" or, "He wouldn't have liked my dying at 
HIS place, I dare say!"

However, the compact being virtually made, Mr. Guppy proposes to 
dispatch the trusty Smallweed to ascertain if Mr. Krook is at home, 
as in that case they may complete the negotiation without delay.  
Mr. Jobling approving, Smallweed puts himself under the tall hat 
and conveys it out of the dining-rooms in the Guppy manner.  He 
soon returns with the intelligence that Mr. Krook is at home and 
that he has seen him through the shop-door, sitting in the back 
premises, sleeping "like one o'clock."

"Then I'll pay," says Mr. Guppy, "and we'll go and see him.  Small, 
what will it be?"

Mr. Smallweed, compelling the attendance of the waitress with one 
hitch of his eyelash, instantly replies as follows: "Four veals and 
hams is three, and four potatoes is three and four, and one summer 
cabbage is three and six, and three marrows is four and six, and 
six breads is five, and three Cheshires is five and three, and four 
half-pints of half-and-half is six and three, and four small rums 
is eight and three, and three Pollys is eight and six.  Eight and 
six in half a sovereign, Polly, and eighteenpence out!"

Not at all excited by these stupendous calculations, Smallweed 
dismisses his friends with a cool nod and remains behind to take a 
little admiring notice of Polly, as opportunity may serve, and to 
read the daily papers, which are so very large in proportion to 
himself, shorn of his hat, that when he holds up the Times to run 
his eye over the columns, he seems to have retired for the night 
and to have disappeared under the bedclothes.

Mr. Guppy and Mr. Jobling repair to the rag and bottle shop, where 
they find Krook still sleeping like one o'clock, that is to say, 
breathing stertorously with his chin upon his breast and quite 
insensible to any external sounds or even to gentle shaking.  On 
the table beside him, among the usual lumber, stand an empty gin-
bottle and a glass.  The unwholesome air is so stained with this 
liquor that even the green eyes of the cat upon her shelf, as they 
open and shut and glimmer on the visitors, look drunk.

"Hold up here!" says Mr. Guppy, giving the relaxed figure of the 
old man another shake.  "Mr. Krook!  Halloa, sir!"

But it would seem as easy to wake a bundle of old clothes with a 
spirituous heat smouldering in it.  "Did you ever see such a stupor 
as he falls into, between drink and sleep?" says Mr. Guppy.

"If this is his regular sleep," returns Jobling, rather alarmed, 
"it'll last a long time one of these days, I am thinking."

"It's always more like a fit than a nap," says Mr. Guppy, shaking 
him again.  "Halloa, your lordship!  Why, he might be robbed fifty 
times over!  Open your eyes!"

After much ado, he opens them, but without appearing to see his 
visitors or any other objects.  Though he crosses one leg on 
another, and folds his hands, and several times closes and opens 
his parched lips, he seems to all intents and purposes as 
insensible as before.

"He is alive, at any rate," says Mr. Guppy.  "How are you, my Lord 
Chancellor.  I have brought a friend of mine, sir, on a little 
matter of business."

The old man still sits, often smacking his dry lips without the 
least consciousness.  After some minutes he makes an attempt to 
rise.  They help him up, and he staggers against the wall and 
stares at them.

"How do you do, Mr. Krook?" says Mr. Guppy in some discomfiture.  
"How do you do, sir?  You are looking charming, Mr. Krook.  I hope 
you are pretty well?"

The old man, in aiming a purposeless blow at Mr. Guppy, or at 
nothing, feebly swings himself round and comes with his face 
against the wall.  So he remains for a minute or two, heaped up 
against it, and then staggers down the shop to the front door.  The 
air, the movement in the court, the lapse of time, or the 
combination of these things recovers him.  He comes back pretty 
steadily, adjusting his fur cap on his head and looking keenly at 
them.

"Your servant, gentlemen; I've been dozing.  Hi! I am hard to wake, 
odd times."

"Rather so, indeed, sir," responds Mr. Guppy.

"What?  You've been a-trying to do it, have you?" says the 
suspicious Krook.

"Only a little," Mr. Guppy explains.

The old man's eye resting on the empty bottle, he takes it up, 
examines it, and slowly tilts it upside down.

"I say!" he cries like the hobgoblin in the story.  "Somebody's 
been making free here!"

"I assure you we found it so," says Mr. Guppy.  "Would you allow me 
to get it filled for you?"

"Yes, certainly I would!" cries Krook in high glee.  "Certainly I 
would!  Don't mention it!  Get it filled next door--Sol's Arms--the 
Lord Chancellor's fourteenpenny.  Bless you, they know ME!"

He so presses the empty bottle upon Mr. Guppy that that gentleman, 
with a nod to his friend, accepts the trust and hurries out and 
hurries in again with the bottle filled.  The old man receives it 
in his arms like a beloved grandchild and pats it tenderly.

"But, I say," he whispers, with his eyes screwed up, after tasting 
it, "this ain't the Lord Chancellor's fourteenpenny.  This is 
eighteenpenny!"

"I thought you might like that better," says Mr. Guppy.

"You're a nobleman, sir," returns Krook with another taste, and his 
hot breath seems to come towards them like a flame.  "You're a 
baron of the land."

Taking advantage of this auspicious moment, Mr. Guppy presents his 
friend under the impromptu name of Mr. Weevle and states the object 
of their visit.  Krook, with his bottle under his arm (he never 
gets beyond a certain point of either drunkenness or sobriety), 
takes time to survey his proposed lodger and seems to approve of 
him.  "You'd like to see the room, young man?" he says.  "Ah!  It's 
a good room!  Been whitewashed.  Been cleaned down with soft soap 
and soda.  Hi!  It's worth twice the rent, letting alone my company 
when you want it and such a cat to keep the mice away."

Commending the room after this manner, the old man takes them 
upstairs, where indeed they do find it cleaner than it used to be 
and also containing some old articles of furniture which he has dug 
up from his inexhaustible stores.  The terms are easily concluded--
for the Lord Chancellor cannot be hard on Mr. Guppy, associated as 
he is with Kenge and Carboy, Jarndyce and Jarndyce, and other 
famous claims on his professional consideration--and it is agreed 
that Mr. Weevle shall take possession on the morrow.  Mr. Weevle 
and Mr. Guppy then repair to Cook's Court, Cursitor Street, where 
the personal introduction of the former to Mr. Snagsby is effected 
and (more important) the vote and interest of Mrs. Snagsby are 
secured.  They then report progress to the eminent Smallweed, 
waiting at the office in his tall hat for that purpose, and 
separate, Mr. Guppy explaining that he would terminate his little 
entertainment by standing treat at the play but that there are 
chords in the human mind which would render it a hollow mockery.

On the morrow, in the dusk of evening, Mr. Weevle modestly appears 
at Krook's, by no means incommoded with luggage, and establishes 
himself in his new lodging, where the two eyes in the shutters 
stare at him in his sleep, as if they were full of wonder.  On the 
following day Mr. Weevle, who is a handy good-for-nothing kind of 
young fellow, borrows a needle and thread of Miss Flite and a 
hammer of his landlord and goes to work devising apologies for 
window-curtains, and knocking up apologies for shelves, and hanging 
up his two teacups, milkpot, and crockery sundries on a pennyworth 
of little hooks, like a shipwrecked sailor making the best of it.

But what Mr. Weevle prizes most of all his few possessions (next 
after his light whiskers, for which he has an attachment that only 
whiskers can awaken in the breast of man) is a choice collection of 
copper-plate impressions from that truly national work The 
Divinities of Albion, or Galaxy Gallery of British Beauty, 
representing ladies of title and fashion in every variety of smirk 
that art, combined with capital, is capable of producing.  With 
these magnificent portraits, unworthily confined in a band-box 
during his seclusion among the market-gardens, he decorates his 
apartment; and as the Galaxy Gallery of British Beauty wears every 
variety of fancy dress, plays every variety of musical instrument, 
fondles every variety of dog, ogles every variety of prospect, and 
is backed up by every variety of flower-pot and balustrade, the 
result is very imposing.

But fashion is Mr. Weevle's, as it was Tony Jobling's, weakness.  
To borrow yesterday's paper from the Sol's Arms of an evening and 
read about the brilliant and distinguished meteors that are 
shooting across the fashionable sky in every direction is 
unspeakable consolation to him.  To know what member of what 
brilliant and distinguished circle accomplished the brilliant and 
distinguished feat of joining it yesterday or contemplates the no 
less brilliant and distinguished feat of leaving it to-morrow gives 
him a thrill of joy.  To be informed what the Galaxy Gallery of 
British Beauty is about, and means to be about, and what Galaxy 
marriages are on the tapis, and what Galaxy rumours are in 
circulation, is to become acquainted with the most glorious 
destinies of mankind.  Mr. Weevle reverts from this intelligence to 
the Galaxy portraits implicated, and seems to know the originals, 
and to be known of them.

For the rest he is a quiet lodger, full of handy shifts and devices 
as before mentioned, able to cook and clean for himself as well as 
to carpenter, and developing social inclinations after the shades 
of evening have fallen on the court.  At those times, when he is 
not visited by Mr. Guppy or by a small light in his likeness 
quenched in a dark hat, he comes out of his dull room--where he has 
inherited the deal wilderness of desk bespattered with a rain of 
ink--and talks to Krook or is "very free," as they call it in the 
court, commendingly, with any one disposed for conversation.  
Wherefore, Mrs. Piper, who leads the court, is impelled to offer 
two remarks to Mrs. Perkins: firstly, that if her Johnny was to 
have whiskers, she could wish 'em to be identically like that young 
man's; and secondly, "Mark my words, Mrs. Perkins, ma'am, and don't 
you be surprised, Lord bless you, if that young man comes in at 
last for old Krook's money!"



CHAPTER XXI

The Smallweed Family


In a rather ill-favoured and ill-savoured neighbourhood, though one 
of its rising grounds bears the name of Mount Pleasant, the Elfin 
Smallweed, christened Bartholomew and known on the domestic hearth 
as Bart, passes that limited portion of his time on which the 
office and its contingencies have no claim.  He dwells in a little 
narrow street, always solitary, shady, and sad, closely bricked in 
on all sides like a tomb, but where there yet lingers the stump of 
an old forest tree whose flavour is about as fresh and natural as 
the Smallweed smack of youth.

There has been only one child in the Smallweed family for several 
generations.  Little old men and women there have been, but no 
child, until Mr. Smallweed's grandmother, now living, became weak 
in her intellect and fell (for the first time) into a childish 
state.  With such infantine graces as a total want of observation, 
memory, understanding, and interest, and an eternal disposition to 
fall asleep over the fire and into it, Mr. Smallweed's grandmother 
has undoubtedly brightened the family.

Mr. Smallweed's grandfather is likewise of the party.  He is in a 
helpless condition as to his lower, and nearly so as to his upper, 
limbs, but his mind is unimpaired.  It holds, as well as it ever 
held, the first four rules of arithmetic and a certain small 
collection of the hardest facts.  In respect of ideality, 
reverence, wonder, and other such phrenological attributes, it is 
no worse off than it used to be.  Everything that Mr. Smallweed's 
grandfather ever put away in his mind was a grub at first, and is a 
grub at last.  In all his life he has never bred a single 
butterfly.

The father of this pleasant grandfather, of the neighbourhood of 
Mount Pleasant, was a horny-skinned, two-legged, money-getting 
species of spider who spun webs to catch unwary flies and retired 
into holes until they were entrapped.  The name of this old pagan's 
god was Compound Interest.  He lived for it, married it, died of 
it.  Meeting with a heavy loss in an honest little enterprise in 
which all the loss was intended to have been on the other side, he 
broke something--something necessary to his existence, therefore it 
couldn't have been his heart--and made an end of his career.  As 
his character was not good, and he had been bred at a charity 
school in a complete course, according to question and answer, of 
those ancient people the Amorites and Hittites, he was frequently 
quoted as an example of the failure of education.

His spirit shone through his son, to whom he had always preached of 
"going out" early in life and whom he made a clerk in a sharp 
scrivener's office at twelve years old.  There the young gentleman 
improved his mind, which was of a lean and anxious character, and 
developing the family gifts, gradually elevated himself into the 
discounting profession.  Going out early in life and marrying late, 
as his father had done before him, he too begat a lean and anxious-
minded son, who in his turn, going out early in life and marrying 
late, became the father of Bartholomew and Judith Smallweed, twins.  
During the whole time consumed in the slow growth of this family 
tree, the house of Smallweed, always early to go out and late to 
marry, has strengthened itself in its practical character, has 
discarded all amusements, discountenanced all story-books, fairy-
tales, fictions, and fables, and banished all levities whatsoever.  
Hence the gratifying fact that it has had no child born to it and 
that the complete little men and women whom it has produced have 
been observed to bear a likeness to old monkeys with something 
depressing on their minds.

At the present time, in the dark little parlour certain feet below 
the level of the street--a grim, hard, uncouth parlour, only 
ornamented with the coarsest of baize table-covers, and the hardest 
of sheet-iron tea-trays, and offering in its decorative character 
no bad allegorical representation of Grandfather Smallweed's mind--
seated in two black horsehair porter's chairs, one on each side of 
the fire-place, the superannuated Mr. and Mrs. Smallweed while away 
the rosy hours.  On the stove are a couple of trivets for the pots 
and kettles which it is Grandfather Smallweed's usual occupation to 
watch, and projecting from the chimney-piece between them is a sort 
of brass gallows for roasting, which he also superintends when it 
is in action.  Under the venerable Mr. Smallweed's seat and guarded 
by his spindle legs is a drawer in his chair, reported to contain 
property to a fabulous amount.  Beside him is a spare cushion with 
which he is always provided in order that he may have something to 
throw at the venerable partner of his respected age whenever she 
makes an allusion to money--a subject on which he is particularly 
sensitive.

"And where's Bart?" Grandfather Smallweed inquires of Judy, Bart's 
twin sister.

"He an't come in yet," says Judy.

"It's his tea-time, isn't it?"

"No."

"How much do you mean to say it wants then?"

"Ten minutes."

"Hey?"

"Ten minutes." (Loud on the part of Judy.)

"Ho!" says Grandfather Smallweed.  "Ten minutes."

Grandmother Smallweed, who has been mumbling and shaking her head 
at the trivets, hearing figures mentioned, connects them with money 
and screeches like a horrible old parrot without any plumage, "Ten 
ten-pound notes!"

Grandfather Smallweed immediately throws the cushion at her.

"Drat you, be quiet!" says the good old man.

The effect of this act of jaculation is twofold.  It not only 
doubles up Mrs. Smallweed's head against the side of her porter's 
chair and causes her to present, when extricated by her 
granddaughter, a highly unbecoming state of cap, but the necessary 
exertion recoils on Mr. Smallweed himself, whom it throws back into 
HIS porter's chair like a broken puppet.  The excellent old 
gentleman being at these times a mere clothes-bag with a black 
skull-cap on the top of it, does not present a very animated 
appearance until he has undergone the two operations at the hands 
of his granddaughter of being shaken up like a great bottle and 
poked and punched like a great bolster.  Some indication of a neck 
being developed in him by these means, he and the sharer of his 
life's evening again fronting one another in their two porter's 
chairs, like a couple of sentinels long forgotten on their post by 
the Black Serjeant, Death.

Judy the twin is worthy company for these associates.  She is so 
indubitably sister to Mr. Smallweed the younger that the two 
kneaded into one would hardly make a young person of average 
proportions, while she so happily exemplifies the before-mentioned 
family likeness to the monkey tribe that attired in a spangled robe 
and cap she might walk about the table-land on the top of a barrel-
organ without exciting much remark as an unusual specimen.  Under 
existing circumstances, however, she is dressed in a plain, spare 
gown of brown stuff.

Judy never owned a doll, never heard of Cinderella, never played at 
any game.  She once or twice fell into children's company when she 
was about ten years old, but the children couldn't get on with 
Judy, and Judy couldn't get on with them.  She seemed like an 
animal of another species, and there was instinctive repugnance on 
both sides.  It is very doubtful whether Judy knows how to laugh.  
She has so rarely seen the thing done that the probabilities are 
strong the other way.  Of anything like a youthful laugh, she 
certainly can have no conception.  If she were to try one, she 
would find her teeth in her way, modelling that action of her face, 
as she has unconsciously modelled all its other expressions, on her 
pattern of sordid age.  Such is Judy.

And her twin brother couldn't wind up a top for his life.  He knows 
no more of Jack the Giant Killer or of Sinbad the Sailor than he 
knows of the people in the stars.  He could as soon play at leap-
frog or at cricket as change into a cricket or a frog himself.  But 
he is so much the better off than his sister that on his narrow 
world of fact an opening has dawned into such broader regions as 
lie within the ken of Mr. Guppy.  Hence his admiration and his 
emulation of that shining enchanter.

Judy, with a gong-like clash and clatter, sets one of the sheet-
iron tea-trays on the table and arranges cups and saucers.  The 
bread she puts on in an iron basket, and the butter (and not much 
of it) in a small pewter plate.  Grandfather Smallweed looks hard 
after the tea as it is served out and asks Judy where the girl is.

"Charley, do you mean?" says Judy.

"Hey?" from Grandfather Smallweed.

"Charley, do you mean?"

This touches a spring in Grandmother Smallweed, who, chuckling as 
usual at the trivets, cries, "Over the water!  Charley over the 
water, Charley over the water, over the water to Charley, Charley 
over the water, over the water to Charley!" and becomes quite 
energetic about it.  Grandfather looks at the cushion but has not 
sufficiently recovered his late exertion.

"Ha!" he says when there is silence.  "If that's her name.  She 
eats a deal.  It would be better to allow her for her keep."

Judy, with her brother's wink, shakes her head and purses up her 
mouth into no without saying it.

"No?" returns the old man.  "Why not?"

"She'd want sixpence a day, and we can do it for less," says Judy.

"Sure?"

Judy answers with a nod of deepest meaning and calls, as she 
scrapes the butter on the loaf with every precaution against waste 
and cuts it into slices, "You, Charley, where are you?"  Timidly 
obedient to the summons, a little girl in a rough apron and a large 
bonnet, with her hands covered with soap and water and a scrubbing 
brush in one of them, appears, and curtsys.

"What work are you about now?" says Judy, making an ancient snap at 
her like a very sharp old beldame.

"I'm a-cleaning the upstairs back room, miss," replies Charley.

"Mind you do it thoroughly, and don't loiter.  Shirking won't do 
for me.  Make haste!  Go along!" cries Judy with a stamp upon the 
ground.  "You girls are more trouble than you're worth, by half."

On this severe matron, as she returns to her task of scraping the 
butter and cutting the bread, falls the shadow of her brother, 
looking in at the window.  For whom, knife and loaf in hand, she 
opens the street-door.

"Aye, aye, Bart!" says Grandfather Smallweed.  "Here you are, hey?"

"Here I am," says Bart.

"Been along with your friend again, Bart?"

Small nods.

"Dining at his expense, Bart?"

Small nods again.

"That's right.  Live at his expense as much as you can, and take 
warning by his foolish example.  That's the use of such a friend.  
The only use you can put him to," says the venerable sage.

His grandson, without receiving this good counsel as dutifully as 
he might, honours it with all such acceptance as may lie in a 
slight wink and a nod and takes a chair at the tea-table.  The four 
old faces then hover over teacups like a company of ghastly 
cherubim, Mrs. Smallweed perpetually twitching her head and 
chattering at the trivets and Mr. Smallweed requiring to be 
repeatedly shaken up like a large black draught.

"Yes, yes," says the good old gentleman, reverting to his lesson of 
wisdom.  "That's such advice as your father would have given you, 
Bart.  You never saw your father.  More's the pity.  He was my true 
son."  Whether it is intended to be conveyed that he was 
particularly pleasant to look at, on that account, does not appear.

"He was my true son," repeats the old gentleman, folding his bread 
and butter on his knee, "a good accountant, and died fifteen years 
ago."

Mrs. Smallweed, following her usual instinct, breaks out with 
"Fifteen hundred pound.  Fifteen hundred pound in a black box, 
fifteen hundred pound locked up, fifteen hundred pound put away and 
hid!"  Her worthy husband, setting aside his bread and butter, 
immediately discharges the cushion at her, crushes her against the 
side of her chair, and falls back in his own, overpowered.  His 
appearance, after visiting Mrs. Smallweed with one of these 
admonitions, is particularly impressive and not wholly 
prepossessing, firstly because the exertion generally twists his 
black skull-cap over one eye and gives him an air of goblin 
rakishness, secondly because he mutters violent imprecations 
against Mrs. Smallweed, and thirdly because the contrast between 
those powerful expressions and his powerless figure is suggestive 
of a baleful old malignant who would be very wicked if he could.  
All this, however, is so common in the Smallweed family circle that 
it produces no impression.  The old gentleman is merely shaken and 
has his internal feathers beaten up, the cushion is restored to its 
usual place beside him, and the old lady, perhaps with her cap 
adjusted and perhaps not, is planted in her chair again, ready to 
be bowled down like a ninepin.

Some time elapses in the present instance before the old gentleman 
is sufficiently cool to resume his discourse, and even then he 
mixes it up with several edifying expletives addressed to the 
unconscious partner of his bosom, who holds communication with 
nothing on earth but the trivets.  As thus: "If your father, Bart, 
had lived longer, he might have been worth a deal of money--you 
brimstone chatterer!--but just as he was beginning to build up the 
house that he had been making the foundations for, through many a 
year--you jade of a magpie, jackdaw, and poll-parrot, what do you 
mean!--he took ill and died of a low fever, always being a sparing 
and a spare man, fule been a good son, and I think I meant to 
have been one.  But I wasn't.  I was a thundering bad son, that's 
the long and the short of it, and never was a credit to anybody."

"Surprising!" cries the old man.

"However," Mr. George resumes, "the less said about it, the better 
now.  Come! You know the agreement.  Always a pipe out of the two 
months' interest!  (Bosh! It's all correct.  You needn't be afraid 
to order the pipe.  Here's the new bill, and here's the two months' 
interest-money, and a devil-and-all of a scrape it is to get it 
together in my business.)"

Mr. George sits, with his arms folded, consuming the family and the 
parlour while Grandfather Smallweed is assisted by Judy to two 
black leathern cases out of a locked bureau, in one of which he 
secures the document he has just received, and from the other takes 
another similar document which hl of business care--I should like to throw a 
cat at you instead of a cushion, and I will too if you make such a 
confounded fool of yourself!--and your mother, who was a prudent 
woman as dry as a chip, just dwindled away like touchwood after you 
and Judy were born--you are an old pig.  You are a brimstone pig.  
You're a head of swine!"

Judy, not interested in what she has often heard, begins to collect 
in a basin various tributary streams of tea, from the bottoms of 
cups and saucers and from the bottom of the teapot for the little 
charwoman's evening meal.  In like manner she gets together, in the 
iron bread-basket, as many outside fragments and worn-down heels of 
loaves as the rigid economy of the house has left in existence.

"But your father and me were partners, Bart," says the old 
gentleman, "and when I am gone, you and Judy will have all there 
is.  It's rare for you both that you went out early in life--Judy 
to the flower business, and you to the law.  You won't want to 
spend it.  You'll get your living without it, and put more to it.  
When I am gone, Judy will go back to the flower business and you'll 
still stick to the law."

One might infer from Judy's appearance that her business rather lay 
with the thorns than the flowers, but she has in her time been 
apprenticed to the art and mystery of artificial flower-making.  A 
close observer might perhaps detect both in her eye and her 
brother's, when their venerable grandsire anticipates his being 
gone, some little impatience to know when he may be going, and some 
resentful opinion that it is time he went.

"Now, if everybody has done," says Judy, completing her 
preparations, "I'll have that girl in to her tea.  She would never 
leave off if she took it by herself in the kitchen."

Charley is accordingly introduced, and under a heavy fire of eyes, 
sits down to her basin and a Druidical ruin of bread and butter.  
In the active superintendence of this young person, Judy Smallweed 
appears to attain a perfectly geological age and to date from the 
remotest periods.  Her systematic manner of flying at her and 
pouncing on her, with or without pretence, whether or no, is 
wonderful, evincing an accomplishment in the art of girl-driving 
seldom reached by the oldest practitioners.

"Now, don't stare about you all the afternoon," cries Judy, shaking 
her head and stamping her foot as she happens to catch the glance 
which has been previously sounding the basin of tea, "but take your 
victuals and get back to your work."

"Yes, miss," says Charley.

"Don't say yes," returns Miss Smallweed, "for I know what you girls 
are.  Do it without saying it, and then I may begin to believe 
you."

Charley swallows a great gulp of tea in token of submission and so 
disperses the Druidical ruins that Miss Smallweed charges her not 
to gormandize, which "in you girls," she observes, is disgusting.  
Charley might find some more difficulty in meeting her views on the 
general subject of girls but for a knock at the door.

"See who it is, and don't chew when you open it!" cries Judy.

The object of her attentions withdrawing for the purpose, Miss 
Smallweed takes that opportunity of jumbling the remainder of the 
bread and butter together and launching two or three dirty tea-cups 
into the ebb-tide of the basin of tea as a hint that she considers 
the eating and drinking terminated.

"Now!  Who is it, and what's wanted?" says the snappish Judy.

It is one Mr. George, it appears.  Without other announcement or 
ceremony, Mr. George walks in.

"Whew!" says Mr. George.  "You are hot here.  Always a fire, eh?  
Well!  Perhaps you do right to get used to one."  Mr. George makes 
the latter remark to himself as he nods to Grandfather Smallweed.

"Ho! It's you!" cries the old gentleman.  "How de do?  How de do?"

"Middling," replies Mr. George, taking a chair.  "Your 
granddaughter I have had the honour of seeing before; my service to 
you, miss."

"This is my grandson," says Grandfather Smallweed.  "You ha'n't 
seen him before.  He is in the law and not much at home."

"My service to him, too!  He is like his sister.  He is very like 
his sister.  He is devilish like his sister," says Mr. George, 
laying a great and not altogether complimentary stress on his last 
adjective.

"And how does the world use you, Mr. George?" Grandfather Smallweed 
inquires, slowly rubbing his legs.

"Pretty much as usual.  Like a football."

He is a swarthy brown man of fifty, well made, and good looking, 
with crisp dark hair, bright eyes, and a broad chest.  His sinewy 
and powerful hands, as sunburnt as his face, have evidently been 
used to a pretty rough life.  What is curious about him is that he 
sits forward on his chair as if he were, from long habit, allowing 
space for some dress or accoutrements that he has altogether laid 
aside.  His step too is measured and heavy and would go well with a 
weighty clash and jingle of spurs.  He is close-shaved now, but his 
mouth is set as if his upper lip had been for years familiar with a 
great moustache; and his manner of occasionally laying the open 
palm of his broad brown hand upon it is to the same effect.  
Altogether one might guess Mr. George to have been a trooper once 
upon a time.

A special contrast Mr. George makes to the Smallweed family.  
Trooper was never yet billeted upon a household more unlike him.  
It is a broadsword to an oyster-knife.  His developed figure and 
their stunted forms, his large manner filling any amount of room 
and their little narrow pinched ways, his sounding voice and their 
sharp spare tones, are in the strongest and the strangest 
opposition.  As he sits in the middle of the grim parlour, leaning 
a little forward, with his hands upon his thighs and his elbows 
squared, he looks as though, if he remained there long, he would 
absorb into himself the whole family and the whole four-roomed 
house, extra little back-kitchen and all.

"Do you rub your legs to rub life into 'em?" he asks of Grandfather 
Smallweed after looking round the room.

"Why, it's partly a habit, Mr. George, and--yes--it partly helps 
the circulation," he replies.

"The cir-cu-la-tion!" repeats Mr. George, folding his arms upon his 
chest and seeming to become two sizes larger.  "Not much of that, I 
should think."

"Truly I'm old, Mr. George," says Grandfather Smallweed.  "But I 
can carry my years.  I'm older than HER," nodding at his wife, "and 
see what she is?  You're a brimstone chatterer!" with a sudden 
revival of his late hostility.

"Unlucky old soul!" says Mr. George, turning his head in that 
direction.  "Don't scold the old lady.  Look at her here, with her 
poor cap half off her head and her poor hair all in a muddle.  Hold 
up, ma'am.  That's better.  There we are!  Think of your mother, 
Mr. Smallweed," says Mr. George, coming back to his seat from 
assisting her, "if your wife an't enough."

"I suppose you were an excellent son, Mr. George?" the old man 
hints with a leer.

The colour of Mr. George's face rather deepens as he replies, "Why 
no.  I wasn't."

"I am astonished at it."

"So am I.  I ought to have hands to Mr. George, who twists 
it up for a pipelight.  As the old man inspects, through his 
glasses, every up-stroke and down-stroke of both documents before 
he releases them from their leathern prison, and as he counts the 
money three times over and requires Judy to say every word she 
utters at least twice, and is as tremulously slow of speech and 
action as it is possible to be, this business is a long time in 
progress.  When it is quite concluded, and not before, he 
disengages his ravenous eyes and fingers from it and answers Mr. 
George's last remark by saying, "Afraid to order the pipe?  We are 
not so mercenary as that, sir.  Judy, see directly to the pipe and 
the glass of cold brandy-and-water for Mr. George."

The sportive twins, who have been looking straight before them all 
this time except when they have been engrossed by the black 
leathern cases, retire together, generally disdainful of the 
visitor, but leaving him to the old man as two young cubs might 
leave a traveller to the parental bear.

"And there you sit, I suppose, all the day long, eh?" says Mr. 
George with folded arms.

"Just so, just so," the old man nods.

"And don't you occupy yourself at all?"

"I watch the fire--and the boiling and the roasting--"

"When there is any," says Mr. George with great expression.

"Just so.  When there is any."

"Don't you read or get read to?"

The old man shakes his head with sharp sly triumph.  "No, no.  We 
have never been readers in our family.  It don't pay.  Stuff.  
Idleness.  Folly.  No, no!"

"There's not much to choose between your two states," says the 
visitor in a key too low for the old man's dull hearing as he looks 
from him to the old woman and back again.  "I say!" in a louder 
voice.

"I hear you."

"You'll sell me up at last, I suppose, when I am a day in arrear."

"My dear friend!" cries Grandfather Smallweed, stretching out both 
hands to embrace him.  "Never!  Never, my dear friend!  But my 
friend in the city that I got to lend you the money--HE might!"

"Oh! You can't answer for him?" says Mr. George, finishing the 
inquiry in his lower key with the words "You lying old rascal!"

"My dear friend, he is not to be depended on.  I wouldn't trust 
him.  He will have his bond, my dear friend."

"Devil doubt him," says Mr. George.  Charley appearing with a tray, 
on which are the pipe, a small paper of tobacco, and the brandy-
and-water, he asks her, "How do you come here!  You haven't got the 
family face."

"I goes out to work, sir," returns Charley.

The trooper (if trooper he be or have been) takes her bonnet off, 
with a light touch for so strong a hand, and pats her on the head.  
"You give the house almost a wholesome look.  It wants a bit of 
youth as much as it wants fresh air."  Then he dismisses her, 
lights his pipe, and drinks to Mr. Smallweed's friend in the city--
the one solitary flight of that esteemed old gentleman's 
imagination.

"So you think he might be hard upon me, eh?"

"I think he might--I am afraid he would.  I have known him do it," 
says Grandfather Smallweed incautiously, "twenty times."

Incautiously, because his stricken better-half, who has been dozing 
over the fire for some time, is instantly aroused and jabbers 
"Twenty thousand pounds, twenty twenty-pound notes in a money-box, 
twenty guineas, twenty million twenty per cent, twenty--" and is 
then cut short by the flying cushion, which the visitor, to whom 
this singular experiment appears to be a novelty, snatches from her 
face as it crushes her in the usual manner.

"You're a brimstone idiot.  You're a scorpion--a brimstone 
scorpion!  You're a sweltering toad.  You're a chattering 
clattering broomstick witch that ought to be burnt!" gasps the old 
man, prostrate in his chair.  "My dear friend, will you shake me up 
a little?"

Mr. George, who has been looking first at one of them and then at 
the other, as if he were demented, takes his venerable acquaintance 
by the throat on receiving this request, and dragging him upright 
in his chalr as easily as if he were a doll, appears in two minds 
whether or no to shake all future power of cushioning out of him 
and shake him into his grave.  Resisting the temptation, but 
agitating him violently enough to make his head roll like a 
harlequin's, he puts him smartly down in his chair again and 
adjusts his skull-cap with such a rub that the old man winks with 
both eyes for a minute afterwards.

"O Lord!" gasps Mr. Smallweed.  "That'll do.  Thank you, my dear 
friend, that'll do.  Oh, dear me, I'm out of breath.  O Lord!"  And 
Mr. Smallweed says it not without evident apprehensions of his dear 
friend, who still stands over him looming larger than ever.

The alarming presence, however, gradually subsides into its chair 
and falls to smoking in long puffs, consoling itself with the 
philosophical reflection, "The name of your friend in the city 
begins with a D, comrade, and you're about right respecting the 
bond."

"Did you speak, Mr. George?" inquires the old man.

The trooper shakes his head, and leaning forward with his right 
elbow on his right knee and his pipe supported in that hand, while 
his other hand, resting on his left leg, squares his left elbow in 
a martial manner, continues to smoke.  Meanwhile he looks at Mr. 
Smallweed with grave attention and now and then fans the cloud of 
smoke away in order that he may see him the more clearly.

"I take it," he says, making just as much and as little change in 
his position as will enable him to reach the glass to his lips with 
a round, full action, "that I am the only man alive (or dead 
either) that gets the value of a pipe out of YOU?"

"Well," returns the old man, "it's true that I don't see company, 
Mr. George, and that I don't treat.  I can't afford to it.  But as 
you, in your pleasant way, made your pipe a condition--"

"Why, it's not for the value of it; that's no great thing.  It was 
a fancy to get it out of you.  To have something in for my money."

"Ha! You're prudent, prudent, sir!" cries Grandfather Smallweed, 
rubbing his legs.

"Very.  I always was."  Puff.  "It's a sure sign of my prudence 
that I ever found the way here."  Puff.  "Also, that I am what I 
am."  Puff.  "I am well known to be prudent," says Mr. George, 
composedly smoking.  "I rose in life that way."

"Don't he down-hearted, sir.  You may rise yet."

Mr. George laughs and drinks.

"Ha'n't you no relations, now," asks Grandfather Smallweed with a 
twinkle in his eyes, "who would pay off this little principal or 
who would lend you a good name or two that I could persuade my 
friend in the city to make you a further advance upon?  Two good 
names would be sufficient for my friend in the city.  Ha'n't you no 
such relations, Mr. George?"

Mr. George, still composedly smoking, replies, "If I had, I 
shouldn't trouble them.  I have been trouble enough to my 
belongings in my day.  It MAY be a very good sort of penitence in a 
vagabond, who has wasted the best time of his life, to go back then 
to decent people that he never was a credit to and live upon them, 
but it's not my sort.  The best kind of amends then for having gone 
away is to keep away, in my opinion."

"But natural affection, Mr. George," hints Grandfather Smallweed.

"For two good names, hey?" says Mr. George, shaking his head and 
still composedly smoking.  "No.  That's not my sort either."

Grandfather Smallweed has been gradually sliding down in his chair 
since his last adjustment and is now a bundle of clothes with a 
voice in it calling for Judy.  That houri, appearing, shakes him up 
in the usual manner and is charged by the old gentleman to remain 
near him.  For he seems chary of putting his visitor to the trouble 
of repeating his late attentions.

"Ha!" he observes when he is in trim again.  "If you could have 
traced out the captain, Mr. George, it would have been the making 
of you.  If when you first came here, in consequence of our 
advertisement in the newspapers--when I say 'our,' I'm alluding to 
the advertisements of my friend in the city, and one or two others 
who embark their capital in the same way, and are so friendly 
towards me as sometimes to give me a lift with my little pittance--
if at that time you could have helped us, Mr. George, it would have 
been the making of you."

"I was willing enough to be 'made,' as you call it," says Mr. 
George, smoking not quite so placidly as before, for since the 
entrance of Judy he has been in some measure disturbed by a 
fascination, not of the admiring kind, which obliges him to look at 
her as she stands by her grandfather's chair, "but on the whole, I 
am glad I wasn't now."

"Why, Mr. George?  In the name of--of brimstone, why?" says 
Grandfather Smallweed with a plain appearance of exasperation.  
(Brimstone apparently suggested by his eye lighting on Mrs. 
Smallweed in her slumber.)

"For two reasons, comrade."

"And what two reasons, Mr. George?  In the name of the--"

"Of our friend in the city?" suggests Mr. George, composedly 
drinking.

"Aye, if you like.  What two reasons?"

"In the first place," returns Mr. George, but still looking at Judy 
as if she being so old and so like her grandfather it is 
indifferent which of the two he addresses, "you gentlemen took me 
in.  You advertised that Mr. Hawdon (Captain Hawdon, if you hold to 
the saying 'Once a captain, always a captain') was to hear of 
something to his advantage."

"Well?" returns the old man shrilly and sharply.

"Well!" says Mr. George, smoking on.  "It wouldn't have been much 
to his advantage to have been clapped into prison by the whole bill 
and judgment trade of London."

"How do you know that?  Some of his rich relations might have paid 
his debts or compounded for 'em.  Besides, he had taken US in.  He 
owed us immense sums all round.  I would sooner have strangled him 
than had no return.  If I sit here thinking of him," snarls the old 
man, holding up his impotent ten fingers, "I want to strangle him 
now."  And in a sudden access of fury, he throws the cushion at the 
unoffending Mrs. Smallweed, but it passes harmlessly on one side of 
her chair.

"I don't need to be told," returns the trooper, taking his pipe 
from his lips for a moment and carrying his eyes back from 
following the progress of the cushion to the pipe-bowl which is 
burning low, "that he carried on heavily and went to ruin.  I have 
been at his right hand many a day when he was charging upon ruin 
full-gallop.  I was with him when he was sick and well, rich and 
poor.  I laid this hand upon him after he had run through 
everything and broken down everything beneath him--when he held a 
pistol to his head."

"I wish he had let it off," says the benevolent old man, "and blown 
his head into as many pieces as he owed pounds!"

"That would have been a smash indeed," returns the trooper coolly; 
"any way, he had been young, hopeful, and handsome in the days gone 
by, and I am glad I never found him, when he was neither, to lead 
to a result so much to his advantage.  That's reason number one."

"I hope number two's as good?" snarls the old man.

"Why, no.  It's more of a selfish reason.  If I had found him, I 
must have gone to the other world to look.  He was there."

"How do you know he was there?"

"He wasn't here."

"How do you know he wasn't here?"

"Don't lose your temper as well as your money," says Mr. George, 
calmly knocking the ashes out of his pipe.  "He was drowned long 
before.  I am convinced of it.  He went over a ship's side.  
Whether intentionally or accidentally, I don't know.  Perhaps your 
friend in the city does.  Do you know what that tune is, Mr. 
Smallweed?" he adds after breaking off to whistle one, accompanied 
on the table with the empty pipe.

"Tune!" replied the old man.  "No.  We never have tunes here."

"That's the Dead March in Saul.  They bury soldiers to it, so it's 
the natural end of the subject.  Now, if your pretty granddaughter
--excuse me, miss--will condescend to take care of this pipe for two 
months, we shall save the cost of one next time.  Good evening, Mr. 
Smallweed!"

"My dear friend!" the old man gives him both his hands.

"So you think your friend in the city will be hard upon me if I 
fall in a payment?" says the trooper, looking down upon him like a 
giant.

"My dear friend, I am afraid he will," returns the old man, looking 
up at him like a pygmy.

Mr. George laughs, and with a glance at Mr. Smallweed and a parting 
salutation to the scornful Judy, strides out of the parlour, 
clashing imaginary sabres and other metallic appurtenances as he 
goes.

"You're a damned rogue," says the old gentleman, making a hideous 
grimace at the door as he shuts it.  "But I'll lime you, you dog, 
I'll lime you!"

After this amiable remark, his spirit soars into those enchanting 
regions of reflection which its education and pursuits have opened 
to it, and again he and Mrs. Smallweed while away the rosy hours, 
two unrelieved sentinels forgotten as aforesaid by the Black 
Serjeant.

While the twain are faithful to their post, Mr. George strides 
through the streets with a massive kind of swagger and a grave-
enough face.  It is eight o'clock now, and the day is fast drawing 
in.  He stops hard by Waterloo Bridge and reads a playbill, decides 
to go to Astley's Theatre.  Being there, is much delighted with the 
horses and the feats of strength; looks at the weapons with a 
critical eye; disapproves of the combats as giving evidences of 
unskilful swordsmanship; but is touched home by the sentiments.  In 
the last scene, when the Emperor of Tartary gets up into a cart and 
condescends to bless the united lovers by hovering over them with 
the Union Jack, his eyelashes are moistened with emotion.

The theatre over, Mr. George comes across the water again and makes 
his way to that curious region lying about the Haymarket and 
Leicester Square which is a centre of attraction to indifferent 
foreign hotels and indifferent foreigners, racket-courts, fighting-
men, swordsmen, footguards, old china, gaming-houses, exhibitions, 
and a large medley of shabbiness and shrinking out of sight.  
Penetrating to the heart of this region, he arrives by a court and 
a long whitewashed passage at a great brick building composed of 
bare walls, floors, roof-rafters, and skylights, on the front of 
which, if it can be said to have any front, is painted GEORGE'S 
SHOOTING GALLERY, &c.

Into George's Shooting Gallery, &c., he goes; and in it there are 
gaslights (partly turned off now), and two whitened targets for 
rifle-shooting, and archery accommodation, and fencing appliances, 
and all necessaries for the British art of boxing.  None of these 
sports or exercises being pursued in George's Shooting Gallery to-
night, which is so devoid of company that a little grotesque man 
with a large head has it all to himself and lies asleep upon the 
floor.

The little man is dressed something like a gunsmith, in a green-
baize apron and cap; and his face and hands are dirty with 
gunpowder and begrimed with the loading of guns.  As he lies in the 
light before a glaring white target, the black upon him shines 
again.  Not far off is the strong, rough, primitive table with a 
vice upon it at which he has been working.  He is a little man with 
a face all crushed together, who appears, from a certain blue and 
speckled appearance that one of his cheeks presents, to have been 
blown up, in the way of business, at some odd time or times.

"Phil!" says the trooper in a quiet voice.

"All right!" cries Phil, scrambling to his feet.

"Anything been doing?"

"Flat as ever so much swipes," says Phil.  "Five dozen rifle and a 
dozen pistol.  As to aim!"  Phil gives a howl at the recollection.

"Shut up shop, Phil!"

As Phil moves about to execute this order, it appears that he is 
lame, though able to move very quickly.  On the speckled side of 
his face he has no eyebrow, and on the other side he has a bushy 
black one, which want of uniformity gives him a very singular and 
rather sinister appearance.  Everything seems to have happened to 
his hands that could possibly take place consistently with the 
retention of all the fingers, for they are notched, and seamed, and 
crumpled all over.  He appears to be very strong and lifts heavy 
benches about as if he had no idea what weight was.  He has a 
curious way of limping round the gallery with his shoulder against 
the wall and tacking off at objects he wants to lay hold of instead 
of going straight to them, which has left a smear all round the 
four walls, conventionally called "Phil's mark."

This custodian of George's Gallery in George's absence concludes 
his proceedings, when he has locked the great doors and turned out 
all the lights but one, which he leaves to glimmer, by dragging out 
from a wooden cabin in a corner two mattresses and bedding.  These 
being drawn to opposite ends of the gallery, the trooper makes his 
own bed and Phil makes his.

"Phil!" says the master, walking towards him without his coat and 
waistcoat, and looking more soldierly than ever in his braces.  
"You were found in a doorway, weren't you?"

"Gutter," says Phil.  "Watchman tumbled over me."

"Then vagabondizing came natural to YOU from the beginning."

"As nat'ral as possible," says Phil.

"Good night!"

"Good night, guv'ner."

Phil cannot even go straight to bed, but finds it necessary to 
shoulder round two sides of the gallery and then tack off at his 
mattress.  The trooper, after taking a turn or two in the rifle-
distance and looking up at the moon now shining through the 
skylights, strides to his own mattress by a shorter route and goes 
to bed too.



CHAPTER XXII

Mr. Bucket


Allegory looks pretty cool in Lincoln's Inn Fields, though the 
evening is hot, for both Mr. Tulkinghorn's windows are wide open, 
and the room is lofty, gusty, and gloomy.  These may not be 
desirable characteristics when November comes with fog and sleet or 
January with ice and snow, but they have their merits in the sultry 
long vacation weather.  They enable Allegory, though it has cheeks 
like peaches, and knees like bunches of blossoms, and rosy 
swellings for calves to its legs and muscles to its arms, to look 
tolerably cool to-night.

Plenty of dust comes in at Mr. Tulkinghorn's windows, and plenty 
more has generated among his furniture and papers.  It lies thick 
everywhere.  When a breeze from the country that has lost its way 
takes fright and makes a blind hurry to rush out again, it flings 
as much dust in the eyes of Allegory as the law-or Mr. Tulkinghorn, 
one of its trustiest representatives--may scatter, on occasion, in 
the eyes of the laity.

In his lowering magazine of dust, the universal article into which 
his papers and himself, and all his clients, and all things of 
earth, animate and inanimate, are resolving, Mr. Tulkinghorn sits 
at one of the open windows enjoying a bottle of old port.  Though a 
hard-grained man, close, dry, and silent, he can enjoy old wine 
with the best.  He has a priceless bin of port in some artful 
cellar under the Fields, which is one of his many secrets.  When he 
dines alone in chambers, as he has dined to-day, and has his bit of 
fish and his steak or chicken brought in from the coffee-house, he 
descends with a candle to the echoing regions below the deserted 
mansion, and heralded by a remote reverberation of thundering 
doors, comes gravely back encircled by an earthy atmosphere and 
carrying a bottle from which he pours a radiant nectar, two score 
and ten years old, that blushes in the glass to find itself so 
famous and fills the whole room with the fragrance of southern 
grapes.

Mr. Tulkinghorn, sitting in the twilight by the open window, enjoys 
his wine.  As if it whispered to him of its fifty years of silence 
and seclusion, it shuts him up the closer.  More impenetrable than 
ever, he sits, and drinks, and mellows as it were in secrecy, 
pondering at that twilight hour on all the mysteries he knows, 
associated with darkening woods in the country, and vast blank 
shut-up houses in town, and perhaps sparing a thought or two for 
himself, and his family history, and his money, and his will--all a 
mystery to every one--and that one bachelor friend of his, a man of 
the same mould and a lawyer too, who lived the same kind of life 
until he was seventy-five years old, and then suddenly conceiving 
(as it is supposed) an impression that it was too monotonous, gave 
his gold watch to his hair-dresser one summer evening and walked 
leisurely home to the Temple and hanged himself.

But Mr. Tulkinghorn is not alone to-night to ponder at his usual 
length.  Seated at the same table, though with his chair modestly 
and uncomfortably drawn a little way from it, sits a bald, mild, 
shining man who coughs respectfully behind his hand when the lawyer 
bids him fill his glass.

"Now, Snagsby," says Mr. Tulkinghorn, "to go over this odd story 
again."

"If you please, sir."

"You told me when you were so good as to step round here last 
night--"

"For which I must ask you to excuse me if it was a liberty, sir; 
but I remember that you had taken a sort of an interest in that 
person, and I thought it possible that you might--just--wish--to--"

Mr. Tulkinghorn is not the man to help him to any conclusion or to 
admit anything as to any possibility concerning himself.  So Mr. 
Snagsby trails off into saying, with an awkward cough, "I must ask 
you to excuse the liberty, sir, I am sure."

"Not at all," says Mr. Tulkinghorn.  "You told me, Snagsby, that 
you put on your hat and came round without mentioning your 
intention to your wife.  That was prudent I think, because it's not 
a matter of such importance that it requires to be mentioned."

"Well, sir," returns Mr. Snagsby, "you see, my little woman is--not 
to put too fine a point upon it--inquisitive.  She's inquisitive.  
Poor little thing, she's liable to spasms, and it's good for her to 
have her mind employed.  In consequence of which she employs it--I 
should say upon every individual thing she can lay hold of, whether 
it concerns her or not--especially not.  My little woman has a very 
active mind, sir."

Mr. Snagsby drinks and murmurs with an admiring cough behind his 
hand, "Dear me, very fine wine indeed!"

"Therefore you kept your visit to yourself last night?" says Mr. 
Tulkinghorn.  "And to-night too?"

"Yes, sir, and to-night, too.  My little woman is at present in--
not to put too fine a point on it--in a pious state, or in what she 
considers such, and attends the Evening Exertions (which is the 
name they go by) of a reverend party of the name of Chadband.  He 
has a great deal of eloquence at his command, undoubtedly, but I am 
not quite favourable to his style myself.  That's neither here nor 
there.  My little woman being engaged in that way made it easier 
for me to step round in a quiet manner."

Mr. Tulkinghorn assents.  "Fill your glass, Snagsby."

"Thank you, sir, I am sure," returns the stationer with his cough 
of deference.  "This is wonderfully fine wine, sir!"

"It is a rare wine now," says Mr. Tulkinghorn.  "It is fifty years 
old."

"Is it indeed, sir?  But I am not surprised to hear it, I am sure.  
It might be--any age almost."  After rendering this general tribute 
to the port, Mr. Snagsby in his modesty coughs an apology behind 
his hand for drinking anything so precious.

"Will you run over, once again, what the boy said?" asks Mr. 
Tulkinghorn, putting his hands into the pockets of his rusty 
smallclothes and leaning quietly back in his chair.

"With pleasure, sir."

Then, with fidelity, though with some prolixity, the law-stationer 
repeats Jo's statement made to the assembled guests at his house.  
On coming to the end of his narrative, he gives a great start and 
breaks off with, "Dear me, sir, I wasn't aware there was any other 
gentleman present!"

Mr. Snagsby is dismayed to see, standing with an attentive face 
between himself and the lawyer at a little distance from the table, 
a person with a hat and stick in his hand who was not there when he 
himself came in and has not since entered by the door or by either 
of the windows.  There is a press in the room, but its hinges have 
not creaked, nor has a step been audible upon the floor.  Yet this 
third person stands there with his attentive face, and his hat and 
stick in his hands, and his hands behind him, a composed and quiet 
listener.  He is a stoutly built, steady-looking, sharp-eyed man in 
black, of about the middle-age.  Except that he looks at Mr. 
Snagsby as if he were going to take his portrait, there is nothing 
remarkable about him at first sight but his ghostly manner of 
appearing.

"Don't mind this gentleman," says Mr. Tulkinghorn in his quiet way.  
"This is only Mr. Bucket."

"Oh, indeed, sir?" returns the stationer, expressing by a cough 
that he is quite in the dark as to who Mr. Bucket may be.

"I wanted him to hear this story," says the lawyer, "because I have 
half a mind (for a reason) to know more of it, and he is very 
intelligent in such things.  What do you say to this, Bucket?"

"It's very plain, sir.  Since our people have moved this boy on, 
and he's not to be found on his old lay, if Mr. Snagsby don't 
object to go down with me to Tom-all-Alone's and point him out, we 
can have him here in less than a couple of hours' time.  I can do 
it without Mr. Snagsby, of course, but this is the shortest way."

"Mr. Bucket is a detective officer, Snagsby," says the lawyer in 
explanation.

"Is he indeed, sir?" says Mr. Snagsby with a strong tendency in his 
clump of hair to stand on end.

"And if you have no real objection to accompany Mr. Bucket to the 
place in question," pursues the lawyer, "I shall feel obliged to 
you if you will do so."

In a moment's hesitation on the part of Mr. Snagsby, Bucket dips 
down to the bottom of his mind.

"Don't you be afraid of hurting the boy," he says.  "You won't do 
that.  It's all right as far as the boy's concerned.  We shall only 
bring him here to ask him a question or so I want to put to him, 
and he'll be paid for his trouble and sent away again.  It'll be a 
good job for him.  I promise you, as a man, that you shall see the 
boy sent away all right.  Don't you be afraid of hurting him; you 
an't going to do that."

"Very well, Mr. Tulkinghorn!" cries Mr. Snagsby cheerfully.  And 
reassured, "Since that's the case--"

"Yes!  And lookee here, Mr. Snagsby," resumes Bucket, taking him 
aside by the arm, tapping him familiarly on the breast, and 
speaking in a confidential tone.  "You're a man of the world, you 
know, and a man of business, and a man of sense.  That's what YOU 
are."

"I am sure I am much obliged to you for your good opinion," returns 
the stationer with his cough of modesty, "but--"

"That's what YOU are, you know," says Bucket.  "Now, it an't 
necessary to say to a man like you, engaged in your business, which 
is a business of trust and requires a person to be wide awake and 
have his senses about him and his head screwed on tight (I had an 
uncle in your business once)--it an't necessary to say to a man 
like you that it's the best and wisest way to keep little matters 
like this quiet.  Don't you see?  Quiet!"

"Certainly, certainly," returns the other.

"I don't mind telling YOU," says Bucket with an engaging appearance 
of frankness, "that as far as I can understand it, there seems to 
be a doubt whether this dead person wasn't entitled to a little 
property, and whether this female hasn't been up to some games 
respecting that property, don't you see?"

"Oh!" says Mr. Snagsby, but not appearing to see quite distinctly.

"Now, what YOU want," pursues Bucket, again tapping Mr. Snagsby on 
the breast in a comfortable and soothing manner, "is that every 
person should have their rights according to justice.  That's what 
YOU want."

"To be sure," returns Mr. Snagsby with a nod.

"On account of which, and at the same time to oblige a--do you call 
it, in your business, customer or client?  I forget how my uncle 
used to call it."

"Why, I generally say customer myself," replies Mr. Snagsby.

"You're right!" returns Mr. Bucket, shaking hands with him quite 
affectionately.  "--On account of which, and at the same time to 
oblige a real good customer, you mean to go down with me, in 
confidence, to Tom-all-Alone's and to keep the whole thing quiet 
ever afterwards and never mention it to any one.  That's about your 
intentions, if I understand you?"

"You are right, sir.  You are right," says Mr. Snagsby.

"Then here's your hat," returns his new friend, quite as intimate 
with it as if he had made it; "and if you're ready, I am."

They leave Mr. Tulkinghorn, without a ruffle on the surface of his 
unfathomable depths, drinking his old wine, and go down into the 
streets.

"You don't happen to know a very good sort of person of the name of 
Gridley, do you?" says Bucket in friendly converse as they descend 
the stairs.

"No," says Mr. Snagsby, considering, "I don't know anybody of that 
name.  Why?"

"Nothing particular," says Bucket; "only having allowed his temper 
to get a little the better of him and having been threatening some 
respectable people, he is keeping out of the way of a warrant I 
have got against him--which it's a pity that a man of sense should 
do."

As they walk along, Mr. Snagsby observes, as a novelty, that 
however quick their pace may be, his companion still seems in some 
undefinable manner to lurk and lounge; also, that whenever he is 
going to turn to the right or left, he pretends to have a fixed 
purpose in his mind of going straight ahead, and wheels off, 
sharply, at the very last moment.  Now and then, when they pass a 
police-constable on his beat, Mr. Snagsby notices that both the 
constable and his guide fall into a deep abstraction as they come 
towards each other, and appear entirely to overlook each other, and 
to gaze into space.  In a few instances, Mr. Bucket, coming behind 
some under-sized young man with a shining hat on, and his sleek 
hair twisted into one flat curl on each side of his head, almost 
without glancing at him touches him with his stick, upon which the 
young man, looking round, instantly evaporates.  For the most part 
Mr. Bucket notices things in general, with a face as unchanging as 
the great mourning ring on his little finger or the brooch, 
composed of not much diamond and a good deal of setting, which he 
wears in his shirt.

When they come at last to Tom-all-Alone's, Mr. Bucket stops for a 
moment at the corner and takes a lighted bull's-eye from the 
constable on duty there, who then accompanies him with his own 
particular bull's-eye at his waist.  Between his two conductors, 
Mr. Snagsby passes along the middle of a villainous street, 
undrained, unventilated, deep in black mud and corrupt water--
though the roads are dry elsewhere--and reeking with such smells 
and sights that he, who has lived in London all his life, can 
scarce believe his senses.  Branching from this street and its 
heaps of ruins are other streets and courts so infamous that Mr. 
Snagsby sickens in body and mind and feels as if he were going 
every moment deeper down into the infernal gulf.

"Draw off a bit here, Mr. Snagsby," says Bucket as a kind of shabby 
palanquin is borne towards them, surrounded by a noisy crowd.  
"Here's the fever coming up the street!"

As the unseen wretch goes by, the crowd, leaving that object of 
attraction, hovers round the three visitors like a dream of 
horrible faces and fades away up alleys and into ruins and behind 
walls, and with occasional cries and shrill whistles of warning, 
thenceforth flits about them until they leave the place.

"Are those the fever-houses, Darby?"  Mr. Bucket coolly asks as he 
turns his bull's-eye on a line of stinking ruins.

Darby replies that "all them are," and further that in all, for 
months and months, the people "have been down by dozens" and have 
been carried out dead and dying "like sheep with the rot."  Bucket 
observing to Mr. Snagsby as they go on again that he looks a little 
poorly, Mr. Snagsby answers that he feels as if he couldn't breathe 
the dreadful air.

There is inquiry made at various houses for a boy named Jo.  As few 
people are known in Tom-all-Alone's by any Christian sign, there is 
much reference to Mr. Snagsby whether he means Carrots, or the 
Colonel, or Gallows, or Young Chisel, or Terrier Tip, or Lanky, or 
the Brick.  Mr. Snagsby describes over and over again.  There are 
conflicting opinions respecting the original of his picture.  Some 
think it must be Carrots, some say the Brick.  The Colonel is 
produced, but is not at all near the thing.  Whenever Mr. Snagsby 
and his conductors are stationary, the crowd flows round, and from 
its squalid depths obsequious advice heaves up to Mr. Bucket.  
Whenever they move, and the angry bull's-eyes glare, it fades away 
and flits about them up the alleys, and in the ruins, and behind 
the walls, as before.

At last there is a lair found out where Toughy, or the Tough 
Subject, lays him down at night; and it is thought that the Tough 
Subject may be Jo.  Comparison of notes between Mr. Snagsby and the 
proprietress of the house--a drunken face tied up in a black 
bundle, and flaring out of a heap of rags on the floor of a dog-
hutch which is her private apartment--leads to the establishment of 
this conclusion.  Toughy has gone to the doctor's to get a bottle 
of stuff for a sick woman but will be here anon.

"And who have we got here to-night?" says Mr. Bucket, opening 
another door and glaring in with his bull's-eye.  "Two drunken men, 
eh?  And two women?  The men are sound enough," turning back each 
sleeper's arm from his face to look at him.  "Are these your good 
men, my dears?"

"Yes, sir," returns one of the women.  "They are our husbands."

"Brickmakers, eh?"

"Yes, sir."

"What are you doing here?  You don't belong to London."

"No, sir.  We belong to Hertfordshire."

"Whereabouts in Hertfordshire?"

"Saint Albans."

"Come up on the tramp?"

"We walked up yesterday.  There's no work down with us at present, 
but we have done no good by coming here, and shall do none, I 
expect."

"That's not the way to do much good," says Mr. Bucket, turning his 
head in the direction of the unconscious figures on the ground.

"It an't indeed," replies the woman with a sigh.  "Jenny and me 
knows it full well."

The room, though two or three feet higher than the door, is so low 
that the head of the tallest of the visitors would touch the 
blackened ceiling if he stood upright.  It is offensive to every 
sense; even the gross candle burns pale and sickly in the polluted 
air.  There are a couple of benches and a higher bench by way of 
table.  The men lie asleep where they stumbled down, but the women 
sit by the candle.  Lying in the arms of the woman who has spoken 
is a very young child.

"Why, what age do you call that little creature?" says Bucket.  "It 
looks as if it was born yesterday."  He is not at all rough about 
it; and as he turns his light gently on the infant, Mr. Snagsby is 
strangely reminded of another infant, encircled with light, that he 
has seen in pictures.

"He is not three weeks old yet, sir," says the woman.

"Is he your child?"

"Mine."

The other woman, who was bending over it when they came in, stoops 
down again and kisses it as it lies asleep.

"You seem as fond of it as if you were the mother yourself," says 
Mr. Bucket.

"I was the mother of one like it, master, and it died."

"Ah, Jenny, Jenny!" says the other woman to her.  "Better so.  Much 
better to think of dead than alive, Jenny!  Much better!"

"Why, you an't such an unnatural woman, I hope," returns Bucket 
sternly, "as to wish your own child dead?"

"God knows you are right, master," she returns.  "I am not.  I'd 
stand between it and death with my own life if I could, as true as 
any pretty lady."

"Then don't talk in that wrong manner," says Mr. Bucket, mollified 
again.  "Why do you do it?"

"It's brought into my head, master," returns the woman, her eyes 
filling with tears, "when I look down at the child lying so.  If it 
was never to wake no more, you'd think me mad, I should take on so.  
I know that very well.  I was with Jenny when she lost hers--warn't 
I, Jenny?--and I know how she grieved.  But look around you at this 
place.  Look at them," glancing at the sleepers on the ground.  
"Look at the boy you're waiting for, who's gone out to do me a good 
turn.  Think of the children that your business lays with often and 
often, and that YOU see grow up!"

"Well, well," says Mr. Bucket, "you train him respectable, and 
he'll be a comfort to you, and look after you in your old age, you 
know."

"I mean to try hard," she answers, wiping her eyes.  "But I have 
been a-thinking, being over-tired to-night and not well with the 
ague, of all the many things that'll come in his way.  My master 
will be against it, and he'll be beat, and see me beat, and made to 
fear his home, and perhaps to stray wild.  If I work for him ever 
so much, and ever so hard, there's no one to help me; and if he 
should be turned bad 'spite of all I could do, and the time should 
come when I should sit by him in his sleep, made hard and changed, 
an't it likely I should think of him as he lies in my lap now and 
wish he had died as Jenny's child died!"

"There, there!" says Jenny.  "Liz, you're tired and ill.  Let me 
take him."

In doing so, she displaces the mother's dress, but quickly 
readjusts it over the wounded and bruised bosom where the baby has 
been lying.

"It's my dead child," says Jenny, walking up and down as she 
nurses, "that makes me love this child so dear, and it's my dead 
child that makes her love it so dear too, as even to think of its 
being taken away from her now.  While she thinks that, I think what 
fortune would I give to have my darling back.  But we mean the same 
thing, if we knew how to say it, us two mothers does in our poor 
hearts!"

As Mr. Snagsby blows his nose and coughs his cough of sympathy, a 
step is heard without.  Mr. Bucket throws his light into the 
doorway and says to Mr. Snagsby, "Now, what do you say to Toughy?  
Will HE do?"

"That's Jo," says Mr. Snagsby.

Jo stands amazed in the disk of light, like a ragged figure in a 
magic-lantern, trembling to think that he has offended against the 
law in not having moved on far enough.  Mr. Snagsby, however, 
giving him the consolatory assurance, "It's only a job you will be 
paid for, Jo," he recovers; and on being taken outside by Mr. 
Bucket for a little private confabulation, tells his tale 
satisfactorily, though out of breath.

"I have squared it with the lad," says Mr. Bucket, returning, "and 
it's all right.  Now, Mr. Snagsby, we're ready for you."

First, Jo has to complete his errand of good nature by handing over 
the physic he has been to get, which he delivers with the laconic 
verbal direction that "it's to be all took d'rectly."  Secondly, 
Mr. Snagsby has to lay upon the table half a crown, his usual 
panacea for an immense variety of afflictions.  Thirdly, Mr. Bucket 
has to take Jo by the arm a little above the elbow and walk him on 
before him, without which observance neither the Tough Subject nor 
any other Subject could be professionally conducted to Lincoln's 
Inn Fields.  These arrangements completed, they give the women good 
night and come out once more into black and foul Tom-all-Alone's.

By the noisome ways through which they descended into that pit, 
they gradually emerge from it, the crowd flitting, and whistling, 
and skulking about them until they come to the verge, where 
restoration of the bull's-eyes is made to Darby.  Here the crowd, 
like a concourse of imprisoned demons, turns back, yelling, and is 
seen no more.  Through the clearer and fresher streets, never so 
clear and fresh to Mr. Snagsby's mind as now, they walk and ride 
until they come to Mr. Tulkinghorn's gate.

As they ascend the dim stairs (Mr. Tulkinghorn's chambers being on 
the first floor), Mr. Bucket mentions that he has the key of the 
outer door in his pocket and that there is no need to ring.  For a 
man so expert in most things of that kind, Bucket takes time to 
open the door and makes some noise too.  It may be that he sounds a 
note of preparation.

Howbeit, they come at last into the hall, where a lamp is burning, 
and so into Mr. Tulkinghorn's usual room--the room where he drank 
his old wine to-night.  He is not there, but his two old-fashioned 
candlesticks are, and the room is tolerably light.

Mr. Bucket, still having his professional hold of Jo and appearing 
to Mr. Snagsby to possess an unlimited number of eyes, makes a 
little way into this room, when Jo starts and stops.

"What's the matter?" says Bucket in a whisper.

"There she is!" cries Jo.

"Who!"

"The lady!"

A female figure, closely veiled, stands in the middle of the room, 
where the light falls upon it.  It is quite still and silent.  The 
front of the figure is towards them, but it takes no notice of 
their entrance and remains like a statue.

"Now, tell me," says Bucket aloud, "how you know that to be the 
lady."

"I know the wale," replies Jo, staring, "and the bonnet, and the 
gownd."

"Be quite sure of what you say, Tough," returns Bucket, narrowly 
observant of him.  "Look again."

"I am a-looking as hard as ever I can look," says Jo with starting 
eyes, "and that there's the wale, the bonnet, and the gownd."

"What about those rings you told me of?" asks Bucket.

"A-sparkling all over here," says Jo, rubbing the fingers of his 
left hand on the knuckles of his right without taking his eyes from 
the figure.

The figure removes the right-hand glove and shows the hand.

"Now, what do you say to that?" asks Bucket.

Jo shakes his head.  "Not rings a bit like them.  Not a hand like 
that."

"What are you talking of?" says Bucket, evidently pleased though, 
and well pleased too.

"Hand was a deal whiter, a deal delicater, and a deal smaller," 
returns Jo.

"Why, you'll tell me I'm my own mother next," says Mr. Bucket.  "Do 
you recollect the lady's voice?"

"I think I does," says Jo.

The figure speaks.  "Was it at all like this?  I will speak as long 
as you like if you are not sure.  Was it this voice, or at all like 
this voice?"

Jo looks aghast at Mr. Bucket.  "Not a bit!"

"Then, what," retorts that worthy, pointing to the figure, "did you 
say it was the lady for?"

"Cos," says Jo with a perplexed stare but without being at all 
shaken in his certainty, "cos that there's the wale, the bonnet, 
and the gownd.  It is her and it an't her.  It an't her hand, nor 
yet her rings, nor yet her woice.  But that there's the wale, the 
bonnet, and the gownd, and they're wore the same way wot she wore 
'em, and it's her height wot she wos, and she giv me a sov'ring and 
hooked it."

"Well!" says Mr. Bucket slightly, "we haven't got much good out of 
YOU.  But, however, here's five shillings for you.  Take care how 
you spend it, and don't get yourself into trouble."  Bucket 
stealthily tells the coins from one hand into the other like 
counters--which is a way he has, his principal use of them being in 
these games of skill--and then puts them, in a little pile, into 
the boy's hand and takes him out to the door, leaving Mr. Snagsby, 
not by any means comfortable under these mysterious circumstances, 
alone with the veiled figure.  But on Mr. Tulkinghorn's coming into 
the room, the veil is raised and a sufficiently good-looking 
Frenchwoman is revealed, though her expression is something of the 
intensest.

"Thank you, Mademoiselle Hortense," says Mr. Tulkinghorn with his 
usual equanimity.  "I will give you no further trouble about this 
little wager."

"You will do me the kindness to remember, sir, that I am not at 
present placed?" says mademoiselle.

"Certainly, certainly!"

"And to confer upon me the favour of your distinguished 
recommendation?"

"By all means, Mademoiselle Hortense."

"A word from Mr. Tulkinghorn is so powerful."

"It shall not be wanting, mademoiselle."

"Receive the assurance of my devoted gratitude, dear sir."

"Good night."

Mademoiselle goes out with an air of native gentility; and Mr. 
Bucket, to whom it is, on an emergency, as natural to be groom of 
the ceremonies as it is to be anything else, shows her downstairs, 
not without gallantry.

"Well, Bucket?" quoth Mr. Tulkinghorn on his return.

"It's all squared, you see, as I squared it myself, sir.  There 
an't a doubt that it was the other one with this one's dress on.  
The boy was exact respecting colours and everything.  Mr. Snagsby, 
I promised you as a man that he should be sent away all right.  
Don't say it wasn't done!"

"You have kept your word, sir," returns the stationer; "and if I 
can be of no further use, Mr. Tulkinghorn, I think, as my little 
woman will be getting anxious--"

"Thank you, Snagsby, no further use," says Mr. Tulkinghorn.  "I am 
quite indebted to you for the trouble you have taken already."

"Not at all, sir.  I wish you good night."

"You see, Mr. Snagsby," says Mr. Bucket, accompanying him to the 
door and shaking hands with him over and over again, "what I like 
in you is that you're a man it's of no use pumping; that's what YOU 
are.  When you know you have done a right thing, you put it away, 
and it's done with and gone, and there's an end of it.  That's what 
YOU do."

"That is certainly what I endeavour to do, sir," returns Mr. 
Snagsby.

"No, you don't do yourself justice.  It an't what you endeavour to 
do," says Mr. Bucket, shaking hands with him and blessing him in 
the tenderest manner, "it's what you DO.  That's what I estimate in 
a man in your way of business."

Mr. Snagsby makes a suitable response and goes homeward so confused 
by the events of the evening that he is doubtful of his being awake 
and out--doubtful of the reality of the streets through which he 
goes--doubtful of the reality of the moon that shines above him.  
He is presently reassured on these subjects by the unchallengeable 
reality of Mrs. Snagsby, sitting up with her head in a perfect 
beehive of curl-papers and night-cap, who has dispatched Guster to 
the police-station with official intelligence of her husband's 
being made away with, and who within the last two hours has passed 
through every stage of swooning with the greatest decorum.  But as 
the little woman feelingly says, many thanks she gets for it!



CHAPTER XXIII

Esther's Narrative


We came home from Mr. Boythorn's after six pleasant weeks.  We were 
often in the park and in the woods and seldom passed the lodge 
where we had taken shelter without looking in to speak to the 
keeper's wife; but we saw no more of Lady Dedlock, except at church 
on Sundays.  There was company at Chesney Wold; and although 
several beautiful faces surrounded her, her face retained the same 
influence on me as at first.  I do not quite know even now whether 
it was painful or pleasurable, whether it drew me towards her or 
made me shrink from her.  I think I admired her with a kind of 
fear, and I know that in her presence my thoughts always wandered 
back, as they had done at first, to that old time of my life.

I had a fancy, on more than one of these Sundays, that what this 
lady so curiously was to me, I was to her--I mean that I disturbed 
her thoughts as she influenced mine, though in some different way.  
But when I stole a glance at her and saw her so composed and 
distant and unapproachable, I felt this to be a foolish weakness.  
Indeed, I felt the whole state of my mind in reference to her to be 
weak and unreasonable, and I remonstrated with myself about it as 
much as I could.

One incident that occurred before we quitted Mr. Boythorn's house, 
I had better mention in this place.

I was walking in the garden with Ada and when I was told that some 
one wished to see me.  Going into the breakfast-room where this 
person was waiting, I found it to be the French maid who had cast 
off her shoes and walked through the wet grass on the day when it 
thundered and lightened.

"Mademoiselle," she began, looking fixedly at me with her too-eager 
eyes, though otherwise presenting an agreeable appearance and 
speaking neither with boldness nor servility, "I have taken a great 
liberty in coming here, but you know how to excuse it, being so 
amiable, mademoiselle."

"No excuse is necessary," I returned, "if you wish to speak to me."

"That is my desire, mademoiselle.  A thousand thanks for the 
permission.  I have your leave to speak.  Is it not?" she said in a 
quick, natural way.

"Certainly," said I.

"Mademoiselle, you are so amiable!  Listen then, if you please.  I 
have left my Lady.  We could not agree.  My Lady is so high, so 
very high.  Pardon!  Mademoiselle, you are right!"  Her quickness 
anticipated what I might have said presently but as yet had only 
thought.  "It is not for me to come here to complain of my Lady.  
But I say she is so high, so very high.  I will not say a word 
more.  All the world knows that."

"Go on, if you please," said I.

"Assuredly; mademoiselle, I am thankful for your politeness.  
Mademoiselle, I have an inexpressible desire to find service with a 
young lady who is good, accomplished, beautiful.  You are good, 
accomplished, and beautiful as an angel.  Ah, could I have the 
honour of being your domestic!"

"I am sorry--" I began.

"Do not dismiss me so soon, mademoiselle!" she said with an 
involuntary contraction of her fine black eyebrows.  "Let me hope a 
moment!  Mademoiselle, I know this service would be more retired 
than that which I have quitted.  Well! I wish that.  I know this 
service would be less distinguished than that which I have quitted.  
Well! I wish that, I know that I should win less, as to wages here.  
Good.  I am content."

"I assure you," said I, quite embarrassed by the mere idea of 
having such an attendant, "that I keep no maid--"

"Ah, mademoiselle, but why not?  Why not, when you can have one so 
devoted to you!  Who would be enchanted to serve you; who would be 
so true, so zealous, and so faithful every day!  Mademoiselle, I 
wish with all my heart to serve you.  Do not speak of money at 
present.  Take me as I am.  For nothing!"

She was so singularly earnest that I drew back, almost afraid of 
her.  Without appearing to notice it, in her ardour she still 
pressed herself upon me, speaking in a rapid subdued voice, though 
always with a certain grace and propriety.

"Mademoiselle, I come from the South country where we are quick and 
where we like and dislike very strong.  My Lady was too high for 
me; I was too high for her.  It is done--past--finlshed!  Receive 
me as your domestic, and I will serve you well.  I will do more for 
you than you figure to yourself now.  Chut!  Mademoiselle, I will--
no matter, I will do my utmost possible in all things.  If you 
accept my service, you will not repent it.  Mademoiselle, you will 
not repent it, and I will serve you well.  You don't know how 
well!"

There was a lowering energy in her face as she stood looking at me 
while I explained the impossibility of my engagmg her (without 
thinking it necessary to say how very little I desired to do so), 
which seemed to bring visibly before me some woman from the streets 
of Paris in the reign of terror.

She heard me out without interruption and then said with her pretty 
accent and in her mildest voice, "Hey, mademoiselle, I have 
received my answer!  I am sorry of it.  But I must go elsewhere and 
seek what I have not found here.  Will you graciously let me kiss 
your hand?"

She looked at me more intently as she took it, and seemed to take 
note, with her momentary touch, of every vein in it.  "I fear I 
surprised you, mademoiselle, on the day of the storm?" she said 
with a parting curtsy.

I confessed that she had surprised us all.

"I took an oath, mademoiselle," she said, smiling, "and I wanted to 
stamp it on my mind so that I might keep it faithfully.  And I 
will!  Adieu, mademoiselle!"

So ended our conference, which I was very glad to bring to a close.  
I supposed she went away from the village, for I saw her no more; 
and nothing else occurred to disturb our tranquil summer pleasures 
until six weeks were out and we returned home as I began just now 
by saying.

At that time, and for a good many weeks after that time, Richard 
was constant in his visits.  Besides coming every Saturday or 
Sunday and remaining with us until Monday morning, he sometimes 
rode out on horseback unexpectedly and passed the evening with us 
and rode back again early next day.  He was as vivacious as ever 
and told us he was very industrious, but I was not easy in my mind 
about him.  It appeared to me that his industry was all 
misdirected.  I could not find that it led to anything but the 
formation of delusive hopes in connexion with the suit already the 
pernicious cause of so much sorrow and ruin.  He had got at the 
core of that mystery now, he told us, and nothing could be plainer 
than that the will under which he and Ada were to take I don't know 
how many thousands of pounds must be finally established if there 
were any sense or justice in the Court of Chancery--but oh, what a 
great IF that sounded in my ears--and that this happy conclusion 
could not be much longer delayed.  He proved this to himself by all 
the weary arguments on that side he had read, and every one of them 
sunk him deeper in the infatuation.  He had even begun to haunt the 
court.  He told us how he saw Miss Flite there daily, how they 
talked together, and how he did her little kindnesses, and how, 
while he laughed at her, he pitied her from his heart.  But he 
never thought--never, my poor, dear, sanguine Richard, capable of 
so much happiness then, and with such better things before him--
what a fatal link was riveting between his fresh youth and her 
faded age, between his free hopes and her caged birds, and her 
hungry garret, and her wandering mind.

Ada loved him too well to mistrust him much in anything he said or 
did, and my guardian, though he frequently complained of the east 
wind and read more than usual in the growlery, preserved a strict 
silence on the subject.  So I thought one day when I went to London 
to meet Caddy Jellyby, at her solicitation, I would ask Richard to 
be in waiting for me at the coach-office, that we might have a 
little talk together.  I found him there when I arrived, and we 
walked away arm in arm.

"Well, Richard," said I as soon as I could begin to be grave with 
him, "are you beginning to feel more settled now?"

"Oh, yes, my dear!" returned Richard.  "I'm all right enough."

"But settled?" said I.

"How do you mean, settled?" returned Richard with his gay laugh.

"Settled in the law," said I.

"Oh, aye," replied Richard, "I'm all right enough."

"You said that before, my dear Richard."

"And you don't think it's an answer, eh?  Well! Perhaps it's not.  
Settled?  You mean, do I feel as if I were settling down?"

"Yes."

"Why, no, I can't say I am settling down," said Richard, strongly 
emphasizing "down," as if that expressed the difficulty, "because 
one can't settle down while this business remains in such an 
unsettled state.  When I say this business, of course I mean the--
forbidden subject."

"Do you think it will ever be in a settled state?" said I.

"Not the least doubt of it," answered Richard.

We walked a little way without speaking, and presently Richard 
addressed me in his frankest and most feeling manner, thus: "My 
dear Esther, I understand you, and I wish to heaven I were a more 
constant sort of fellow.  I don't mean constant to Ada, for I love 
her dearly--better and better every day--but constant to myself.  
(Somehow, I mean something that I can't very well express, but 
you'll make it out.)  If I were a more constant sort of fellow, I 
should have held on either to Badger or to Kenge and Carboy like 
grim death, and should have begun to be steady and systematic by 
this time, and shouldn't be in debt, and--"

"ARE you in debt, Richard?"

"Yes," said Richard, "I am a little so, my dear.  Also, I have 
taken rather too much to billiards and that sort of thing.  Now the 
murder's out; you despise me, Esther, don't you?"

"You know I don't," said I.

"You are kinder to me than I often am to myself," he returned.  "My 
dear Esther, I am a very unfortunate dog not to be more settled, 
but how CAN I be more settled?  If you lived in an unfinished 
house, you couldn't settle down in it; if you were condemned to 
leave everything you undertook unfinished, you would find it hard 
to apply yourself to anything; and yet that's my unhappy case.  I 
was born into this unfinished contention with all its chances and 
changes, and it began to unsettle me before I quite knew the 
difference between a suit at law and a suit of clothes; and it has 
gone on unsettling me ever since; and here I am now, conscious 
sometimes that I am but a worthless fellow to love my confiding 
cousin Ada."

We were in a solitary place, and he put his hands before his eyes 
and sobbed as he said the words.

"Oh, Richard!" said I.  "Do not be so moved.  You have a noble 
nature, and Ada's love may make you worthier every day."

"I know, my dear," he replied, pressing my arm, "I know all that.  
You mustn't mind my being a little soft now, for I have had all 
this upon my mind for a long time, and have often meant to speak to 
you, and have sometimes wanted opportunity and sometimes courage.  
I know what the thought of Ada ought to do for me, but it doesn't 
do it.  I am too unsettled even for that.  I love her most 
devotedly, and yet I do her wrong, in doing myself wrong, every day 
and hour.  But it can't last for ever.  We shall come on for a 
final hearing and get judgment in our favour, and then you and Ada 
shall see what I can really be!"

It had given me a pang to hear him sob and see the tears start out 
between his fingers, but that was infinitely less affecting to me 
than the hopeful animation with which he said these words.

"I have looked well into the papers, Esther.  I have been deep in 
them for months," he continued, recovering his cheerfulness in a 
moment, "and you may rely upon it that we shall come out 
triumphant.  As to years of delay, there has been no want of them, 
heaven knows!  And there is the greater probability of our bringing 
the matter to a speedy close; in fact, it's on the paper now.  It 
will be all right at last, and then you shall see!"

Recalling how he had just now placed Messrs. Kenge and Carboy in 
the same category with Mr. Badger, I asked him when he intended to 
be articled in Lincoln's Inn.

"There again!  I think not at all, Esther," he returned with an 
effort.  "I fancy I have had enough of it.  Having worked at 
Jarndyce and Jarndyce like a galley slave, I have slaked my thirst 
for the law and satisfied myself that I shouldn't like it.  
Besides, I find it unsettles me more and more to be so constantly 
upon the scene of action.  So what," continued Richard, confident 
again by this time, "do I naturally turn my thoughts to?"

"I can't imagine," said I.

"Don't look so serious," returned Richard, "because it's the best 
thing I can do, my dear Esther, I am certain.  It's not as if I 
wanted a profession for life.  These proceedings will come to a 
termination, and then I am provided for.  No.  I look upon it as a 
pursuit which is in its nature more or less unsettled, and 
therefore suited to my temporary condition--I may say, precisely 
suited.  What is it that I naturally turn my thoughts to?"

I looked at him and shook my head.

"What," said Richard, in a tone of perfect conviction, "but the 
army!"

"The army?" said I.

"The army, of course.  What I have to do is to get a commission; 
and--there I am, you know!" said Richard.

And then he showed me, proved by elaborate calculations in his 
pocket-book, that supposing he had contracted, say, two hundred 
pounds of debt in six months out of the army; and that he 
contracted no debt at all within a corresponding period in the 
army--as to which he had quite made up his mind; this step must 
involve a saving of four hundred pounds in a year, or two thousand 
pounds in five years, which was a considerable sum.  And then he 
spoke so ingenuously and sincerely of the sacrifice he made in 
withdrawing himself for a time from Ada, and of the earnestness 
with which he aspired--as in thought he always did, I know full 
well--to repay her love, and to ensure her happiness, and to 
conquer what was amiss in himself, and to acquire the very soul of 
decision, that he made my heart ache keenly, sorely.  For, I 
thought, how would this end, how could this end, when so soon and 
so surely all his manly qualities were touched by the fatal blight 
that ruined everything it rested on!

I spoke to Richard with all the earnestness I felt, and all the 
hope I could not quite feel then, and implored him for Ada's sake 
not to put any trust in Chancery.  To all I said, Richard readily 
assented, riding over the court and everything else in his easy way 
and drawing the brightest pictures of the character he was to 
settle into--alas, when the grievous suit should loose its hold 
upon him!  We had a long talk, but it always came back to that, in 
substance.

At last we came to Soho Square, where Caddy Jellyby had appointed 
to wait for me, as a quiet place in the neighbourhood of Newman 
Street.  Caddy was in the garden in the centre and hurried out as 
soon as I appeared.  After a few cheerful words, Richard left us 
together.

"Prince has a pupil over the way, Esther," said Caddy, "and got the 
key for us.  So if you will walk round and round here with me, we 
can lock ourselves in and I can tell you comfortably what I wanted 
to see your dear good face about."

"Very well, my dear," said I.  "Nothing could be better."  So 
Caddy, after affectionately squeezing the dear good face as she 
called it, locked the gate, and took my arm, and we began to walk 
round the garden very cosily.

"You see, Esther," said Caddy, who thoroughly enjoyed a little 
confidence, "after you spoke to me about its being wrong to marry 
without Ma's knowledge, or even to keep Ma long in the dark 
respecting our engagement--though I don't believe Ma cares much for 
me, I must say--I thought it right to mention your opinions to 
Prince.  In the first place because I want to profit by everything 
you tell me, and in the second place because I have no secrets from 
Prince."

"I hope he approved, Caddy?"

"Oh, my dear!  I assure you he would approve of anything you could 
say.  You have no idea what an opimon he has of you!"

"Indeed!"

"Esther, it's enough to make anybody but me jealous," said Caddy, 
laughing and shaking her head; "but it only makes me joyful, for 
you are the first friend I ever had, and the best friend I ever can 
have, and nobody can respect and love you too much to please me."

"Upon my word, Caddy," said I, "you are in the general conspiracy 
to keep me in a good humour.  Well, my dear?"

"Well! I am going to tell you," replied Caddy, crossing her hands 
confidentially upon my arm.  "So we talked a good deal about it, 
and so I said to Prince, 'Prince, as Miss Summerson--"

"I hope you didn't say 'Miss Summerson'?"

"No.  I didn't!" cried Caddy, greatly pleased and with the 
brightest of faces.  "I said, 'Esther.'  I said to Prince, 'As 
Esther is decidedly of that opinion, Prince, and has expressed it 
to me, and always hints it when she writes those kind notes, which 
you are so fond of hearing me read to you, I am prepared to 
disclose the truth to Ma whenever you think proper.  And I think, 
Prince,' said I, 'that Esther thinks that I should be in a better, 
and truer, and more honourable position altogether if you did the 
same to your papa.'"

"Yes, my dear," said I.  "Esther certainly does think so."

"So I was right, you see!" exclaimed Caddy.  "Well! This troubled 
Prince a good deal, not because he had the least doubt about it, 
but because he is so considerate of the feelings of old Mr. 
Turveydrop; and he had his apprehensions that old Mr. Turveydrop 
might break his heart, or faint away, or be very much overcome in 
some affecting manner or other if he made such an announcement.  He 
feared old Mr. Turveydrop might consider it undutiful and might 
receive too great a shock.  For old Mr. Turveydrop's deportment is 
very beautiful, you know, Esther," said Caddy, "and his feelings 
are extremely sensitive."

"Are they, my dear?"

"Oh, extremely sensitive.  Prince says so.  Now, this has caused my 
darling child--I didn't mean to use the expression to you, Esther," 
Caddy apologized, her face suffused with blushes, "but I generally 
call Prince my darling child."

I laughed; and Caddy laughed and blushed, and went on'

"This has caused him, Esther--"

"Caused whom, my dear?"

"Oh, you tiresome thing!" said Caddy, laughing, with her pretty 
face on fire.  "My darling child, if you insist upon it!  This has 
caused him weeks of uneasiness and has made him delay, from day to 
day, in a very anxious manner.  At last he said to me, 'Caddy, if 
Miss Summerson, who is a great favourite with my father, could be 
prevailed upon to be present when I broke the subject, I think I 
could do it.'  So I promised I would ask you.  And I made up my 
mind, besides," said Caddy, looking at me hopefully but timidly, 
"that if you consented, I would ask you afterwards to come with me 
to Ma.  This is what I meant when I said in my note that I had a 
great favour and a great assistance to beg of you.  And if you 
thought you could grant it, Esther, we should both be very 
grateful."

"Let me see, Caddy," said I, pretending to consider.  "Really, I 
think I could do a greater thing than that if the need were 
pressing.  I am at your service and the darling child's, my dear, 
whenever you like."

Caddy was quite transported by this reply of mine, being, I 
believe, as susceptible to the least kindness or encouragement as 
any tender heart that ever beat in this world; and after another 
turn or two round the garden, during which she put on an entirely 
new pair of gloves and made herself as resplendent as possible that 
she might do no avoidable discredit to the Master of Deportment, we 
went to Newman Street direct.

Prince was teaching, of course.  We found him engaged with a not 
very hopeful pupil--a stubborn little girl with a sulky forehead, a 
deep voice, and an inanimate, dissatisfied mama--whose case was 
certainly not rendered more hopeful by the confusion into which we 
threw her preceptor.  The lesson at last came to an end, after 
proceeding as discordantly as possible; and when the little girl 
had changed her shoes and had had her white muslin extinguished in 
shawls, she was taken away.  After a few words of preparation, we 
then went in search of Mr. Turveydrop, whom we found, grouped with 
his hat and gloves, as a model of deportment, on the sofa in his 
private apartment--the only comfortable room in the house.  He 
appeared to have dressed at his leisure in the intervals of a light 
collation, and his dressing-case, brushes, and so forth, all of 
quite an elegant kind, lay about.

"Father, Miss Summerson; Miss Jellyby."

"Charmed!  Enchanted!" said Mr. Turveydrop, rising with his high-
shouldered bow.  "Permit me!"  Handing chairs.  "Be seated!"  
Kissing the tips of his left fingers.  "Overjoyed!"  Shutting his 
eyes and rolling.  "My little retreat is made a paradise."  
Recomposing himself on the sofa like the second gentleman in 
Europe.

"Again you find us, Miss Summerson," said he, "using our little 
arts to polish, polish!  Again the sex stimulates us and rewards us 
by the condescension of its lovely presence.  It is much in these 
times (and we have made an awfully degenerating business of it 
since the days of his Royal Highness the Prince Regent--my patron, 
if I may presume to say so) to experience that deportment is not 
wholly trodden under foot by mechanics.  That it can yet bask in 
the smile of beauty, my dear madam."

I said nothing, which I thought a suitable reply; and he took a 
pinch of snuff.

"My dear son," said Mr. Turveydrop, "you have four schools this 
afternoon.  I would recommend a hasty sandwich."

"Thank you, father," returned Prince, "I will be sure to be 
punctual.  My dear father, may I beg you to prepare your mind for 
what I am going to say?"

"Good heaven!" exclaimed the model, pale and aghast as Prince and 
Caddy, hand in hand, bent down before him.  "What is this?  Is this 
lunacy!  Or what is this?"

"Father," returned Prince with great submission, "I love this young 
lady, and we are engaged."

"Engaged!" cried Mr. Turveydrop, reclining on the sofa and shutting 
out the sight with his hand.  "An arrow launched at my brain by my 
own child!"

"We have been engaged for some time, father," faltered Prince, "and 
Miss Summerson, hearing of it, advised that we should declare the 
fact to you and was so very kind as to attend on the present 
occasion.  Miss Jellyby is a young lady who deeply respects you, 
father."

Mr. Turveydrop uttered a groan.

"No, pray don't!  Pray don't, father," urged his son.  "Miss 
Jellyby is a young lady who deeply respects you, and our first 
desire is to consider your comfort."

Mr. Turveydrop sobbed.

"No, pray don't, father!" cried his son.

"Boy," said Mr. Turveydrop, "it is well that your sainted mother is 
spared this pang.  Strike deep, and spare not.  Strike home, sir, 
strike home!"

"Pray don't say so, father," implored Prince, in tears.  "It goes 
to my heart.  I do assure you, father, that our first wish and 
intention is to consider your comfort.  Caroline and I do not 
forget our duty--what is my duty is Caroline's, as we have often 
said together--and with your approval and consent, father, we will 
devote ourselves to making your life agreeable."

"Strike home," murmured Mr. Turveydrop.  "Strike home!"  But he 
seemed to listen, I thought, too.

"My dear father," returned Prince, "we well know what little 
comforts you are accustomed to and have a right to, and it will 
always be our study and our pride to provide those before anything.  
If you will bless us with your approval and consent, father, we 
shall not think of being married until it is quite agreeable to 
you; and when we ARE married, we shall always make you--of course--
our first consideration.  You must ever be the head and master 
here, father; and we feel how truly unnatural it would be in us if 
we failed to know it or if we failed to exert ourselves in every 
possible way to please you."

Mr. Turveydrop underwent a severe internal struggle and came 
upright on the sofa again with his cheeks puffing over his stiff 
cravat, a perfect model of parental deportment.

"My son!" said Mr. Turveydrop.  "My children!  I cannot resist your 
prayer.  Be happy!"

His benignity as he raised his future daughter-in-law and stretched 
out his hand to his son (who kissed it with affectionate respect 
and gratitude) was the most confusing sight I ever saw.

"My children," said Mr. Turveydrop, paternally encircling Caddy 
with his left arm as she sat beside him, and putting his right hand 
gracefully on his hip.  "My son and daughter, your happiness shall 
be my care.  I will watch over you.  You shall always live with 
me"--meaning, of course, I will always live with you--"this house 
is henceforth as much yours as mine; consider it your home.  May 
you long live to share it with me!"

The power of his deportment was such that they really were as much 
overcome with thankfulness as if, instead of quartering himself 
upon them for the rest of his life, he were making some munificent 
sacrifice in their favour.

"For myself, my children," said Mr. Turveydrop, "I am falling into 
the sear and yellow leaf, and it is impossible to say how long the 
last feeble traces of gentlemanly deportment may linger in this 
weaving and spinning age.  But, so long, I will do my duty to 
society and will show myself, as usual, about town.  My wants are 
few and simple.  My little apartment here, my few essentials for 
the toilet, my frugal morning meal, and my little dinner will 
suffice.  I charge your dutiful affection with the supply of these 
requirements, and I charge myself with all the rest."

They were overpowered afresh by his uncommon generosity.

"My son," said Mr. Turveydrop, "for those little points in which 
you are deficient--points of deportment, which are born with a man, 
which may be improved by cultivation, but can never be originated--
you may still rely on me.  I have been faithful to my post since 
the days of his Royal Highness the Prince Regent, and I will not 
desert it now.  No, my son.  If you have ever contemplated your 
father's poor position with a feeling of pride, you may rest 
assured that he will do nothing to tarnish it.  For yourself, 
Prince, whose character is different (we cannot be all alike, nor 
is it advisable that we should), work, be industrious, earn money, 
and extend the connexion as much as possible."

"That you may depend I will do, dear father, with all my heart," 
replied Prince.

"I have no doubt of it," said Mr. Turveydrop.  "Your qualities are 
not shining, my dear child, but they are steady and useful.  And to 
both of you, my children, I would merely observe, in the spirit of 
a sainted wooman on whose path I had the happiness of casting, I 
believe, SOME ray of light, take care of the establishment, take 
care of my simple wants, and bless you both!"

Old Mr. Turveydrop then became so very gallant, in honour of the 
occasion, that I told Caddy we must really go to Thavies Inn at 
once if we were to go at all that day.  So we took our departure 
after a very loving farewell between Caddy and her betrothed, and 
during our walk she was so happy and so full of old Mr. 
Turveydrop's praises that I would not have said a word in his 
disparagement for any consideration.

The house in Thavies Inn had bills in the windows annoucing that it 
was to let, and it looked dirtier and gloomier and ghastlier than 
ever.  The name of poor Mr. Jellyby had appeared in the list of 
bankrupts but a day or two before, and he was shut up in the 
dining-room with two gentlemen and a heap of blue bags, account-
books, and papers, making the most desperate endeavours to 
understand his affairs.  They appeared to me to be quite beyond his 
comprehension, for when Caddy took me into the dining-room by 
mistake and we came upon Mr. Jellyby in his spectacles, forlornly 
fenced into a corner by the great dining-table and the two 
gentlemen, he seemed to have given up the whole thing and to be 
speechless and insensible.

Going upstairs to Mrs. Jellyby's room (the children were all 
screaming in the kitchen, and there was no servant to be seen), we 
found that lady in the midst of a voluminous correspondence, 
opening, reading, and sorting letters, with a great accumulation of 
torn covers on the floor.  She was so preoccupied that at first she 
did not know me, though she sat looking at me with that curious, 
bright-eyed, far-off look of hers.

"Ah! Miss Summerson!" she said at last.  "I was thinking of 
something so different!  I hope you are well.  I am happy to see 
you.  Mr. Jarndyce and Miss Clare quite well?"

I hoped in return that Mr. Jellyby was quite well.

"Why, not quite, my dear," said Mrs. Jellyby in the calmest manner.  
"He has been unfortunate in his affairs and is a little out of 
spirits.  Happily for me, I am so much engaged that I have no time 
to think about it.  We have, at the present moment, one hundred and 
seventy families, Miss Summerson, averaging five persons in each, 
either gone or going to the left bank of the Niger."

I thought of the one family so near us who were neither gone nor 
going to the left bank of the Niger, and wondered how she could be 
so placid.

"You have brought Caddy back, I see," observed Mrs. Jellyby with a 
glance at her daughter.  "It has become quite a novelty to see her 
here.  She has almost deserted her old employment and in fact 
obliges me to employ a boy."

"I am sure, Ma--" began Caddy.

"Now you know, Caddy," her mother mildly interposed, "that I DO 
employ a boy, who is now at his dinner.  What is the use of your 
contradicting?"

"I was not going to contradict, Ma," returned Caddy.  "I was only 
going to say that surely you wouldn't have me be a mere drudge all 
my life."

"I believe, my dear," said Mrs. Jellyby, still opening her letters, 
casting her bright eyes smilingly over them, and sorting them as 
she spoke, "that you have a business example before you in your 
mother.  Besides.  A mere drudge?  If you had any sympathy with the 
destinies of the human race, it would raise you high above any such 
idea.  But you have none.  I have often told you, Caddy, you have 
no such sympathy."

"Not if it's Africa, Ma, I have not."

"Of course you have not.  Now, if I were not happily so much 
engaged, Miss Summerson," said Mrs. Jellyby, sweetly casting her 
eyes for a moment on me and considering where to put the particular 
letter she had just opened, "this would distress and disappoint me.  
But I have so much to think of, in connexion with Borrioboola-Gha 
and it is so necessary I should concentrate myself that there is my 
remedy, you see."

As Caddy gave me a glance of entreaty, and as Mrs. Jellyby was 
looking far away into Africa straight through my bonnet and head, I 
thought it a good opportunity to come to the subject of my visit 
and to attract Mrs. Jellyby's attention.

"Perhaps," I began, "you will wonder what has brought me here to 
interrupt you."

"I am always delighted to see Miss Summerson," said Mrs. Jellyby, 
pursuing her employment with a placid smile.  "Though I wish," and 
she shook her head, "she was more interested in the Borrioboolan 
project."

"I have come with Caddy," said I, "because Caddy justly thinks she 
ought not to have a secret from her mother and fancies I shall 
encourage and aid her (though I am sure I don't know how) in 
imparting one."

"Caddy," said Mrs. Jellyby, pausing for a moment in her occupation 
and then serenely pursuing it after shaking her head, "you are 
going to tell me some nonsense."

Caddy untied the strings of her bonnet, took her bonnet off, and 
letting it dangle on the floor by the strings, and crying heartily, 
said, "Ma, I am engaged."

"Oh, you ridiculous child!" observed Mrs. Jellyby with an 
abstracted air as she looked over the dispatch last opened; "what a 
goose you are!"

"I am engaged, Ma," sobbed Caddy, "to young Mr. Turveydrop, at the 
academy; and old Mr. Turveydrop (who is a very gentlemanly man 
indeed) has given his consent, and I beg and pray you'll give us 
yours, Ma, because I never could be happy without it.  I never, 
never could!" sobbed Caddy, quite forgetful of her general 
complainings and of everything but her natural affection.

"You see again, Miss Summerson," observed Mrs. Jellyby serenely, 
"what a happiness it is to be so much occupied as I am and to have 
this necessity for self-concentration that I have.  Here is Caddy 
engaged to a dancing-master's son--mixed up with people who have no 
more sympathy with the destinies of the human race than she has 
herself!  This, too, when Mr. Quale, one of the first 
philanthropists of our time, has mentioned to me that he was really 
disposed to be interested in her!"

"Ma, I always hated and detested Mr. Quale!" sobbed Caddy.

"Caddy, Caddy!" returned Mrs. Jellyby, opening another letter with 
the greatest complacency.  "I have no doubt you did.  How could you 
do otherwise, being totally destitute of the sympathies with which 
he overflows!  Now, if my public duties were not a favourite child 
to me, if I were not occupied with large measures on a vast scale, 
these petty details might grieve me very much, Miss Summerson.  But 
can I permit the film of a silly proceeding on the part of Caddy 
(from whom I expect nothing else) to interpose between me and the 
great African continent?  No.  No," repeated Mrs. Jellyby in a calm 
clear voice, and with an agreeable smile, as she opened more 
letters and sorted them.  "No, indeed."

I was so unprepared for the perfect coolness of this reception, 
though I might have expected it, that I did not know what to say.  
Caddy seemed equally at a loss.  Mrs. Jellyby continued to open and 
sort letters and to repeat occasionally in quite a charming tone of 
voice and with a smile of perfect composure, "No, indeed."

"I hope, Ma," sobbed poor Caddy at last, "you are not angry?"

"Oh, Caddy, you really are an absurd girl," returned Mrs. Jellyby, 
"to ask such questions after what I have said of the preoccupation 
of my mind."

"And I hope, Ma, you give us your consent and wish us well?" said 
Caddy.

"You are a nonsensical child to have done anything of this kind," 
said Mrs. Jellyby; "and a degenerate child, when you might have 
devoted yourself to the great public measure.  But the step is 
taken, and I have engaged a boy, and there is no more to be said.  
Now, pray, Caddy," said Mrs. Jellyby, for Caddy was kissing her, 
"don't delay me in my work, but let me clear off this heavy batch 
of papers before the afternoon post comes in!"

I thought I could not do better than take my leave; I was detained 
for a moment by Caddy's saying, "You won't object to my bringing 
him to see you, Ma?"

"Oh, dear me, Caddy," cried Mrs. Jellyby, who had relapsed into 
that distant contemplation, "have you begun again?  Bring whom?"

"Him, Ma."

"Caddy, Caddy!" said Mrs. Jellyby, quite weary of such little 
matters.  "Then you must bring him some evening which is not a 
Parent Society night, or a Branch night, or a Ramification night.  
You must accommodate the visit to the demands upon my time.  My 
dear Miss Summerson, it was very kind of you to come here to help 
out this silly chit.  Good-bye!  When I tell you that I have fifty-
eight new letters from manufacturing families anxious to understand 
the details of the native and coffee-cultivation question this 
morning, I need not apologize for having very little leisure."

I was not surprised by Caddy's being in low spirits when we went 
downstairs, or by her sobbing afresh on my neck, or by her saying 
she would far rather have been scolded than treated with such 
indifference, or by her confiding to me that she was so poor in 
clothes that how she was ever to be married creditably she didn't 
know.  I gradually cheered her up by dwelling on the many things 
she would do for her unfortunate father and for Peepy when she had 
a home of her own; and finally we went downstairs into the damp 
dark kitchen, where Peepy and his little brothers and sisters were 
grovelling on the stone floor and where we had such a game of play 
with them that to prevent myself from being quite torn to pieces I 
was obliged to fall back on my fairy-tales.  From time to time I 
heard loud voices in the parlour overhead, and occasionally a 
violent tumbling about of the furniture.  The last effect I am 
afraid was caused by poor Mr. Jellyby's breaking away from the 
dining-table and making rushes at the window with the intention of 
throwing himself into the area whenever he made any new attempt to 
understand his affairs.

As I rode quietly home at night after the day's bustle, I thought a 
good deal of Caddy's engagement and felt confirmed in my hopes (in 
spite of the elder Mr. Turveydrop) that she would be the happier 
and better for it.  And if there seemed to be but a slender chance 
of her and her husband ever finding out what the model of 
deportment really was, why that was all for the best too, and who 
would wish them to be wiser?  I did not wish them to be any wiser 
and indeed was half ashamed of not entirely believing in him 
myself.  And I looked up at the stars, and thought about travellers 
in distant countries and the stars THEY saw, and hoped I might 
always be so blest and happy as to be useful to some one in my 
small way.

They were so glad to see me when I got home, as they always were, 
that I could have sat down and cried for joy if that had not been a 
method of making myself disagreeable.  Everybody in the house, from 
the lowest to the highest, showed me such a bright face of welcome, 
and spoke so cheerily, and was so happy to do anything for me, that 
I suppose there never was such a fortunate little creature in the 
world.

We got into such a chatty state that night, through Ada and my 
guardian drawing me out to tell them all about Caddy, that I went 
on prose, prose, prosing for a length of time.  At last I got up to 
my own room, quite red to think how I had been holding forth, and 
then I heard a soft tap at my door.  So I said, "Come in!" and 
there came in a pretty little girl, neatly dressed in mourning, who 
dropped a curtsy.

"If you please, miss," said the little girl in a soft voice, "I am 
Charley."

"Why, so you are," said I, stooping down in astonishment and giving 
her a kiss.  "How glad am I to see you, Charley!"

"If you please, miss," pursued Charley in the same soft voice, "I'm 
your maid."

"Charley?"

"If you please, miss, I'm a present to you, with Mr. Jarndyce's 
love."

I sat down with my hand on Charley's neck and looked at Charley.

"And oh, miss," says Charley, clapping her hands, with the tears 
starting down her dimpled cheeks, "Tom's at school, if you please, 
and learning so good!  And little Emma, she's with Mrs. Blinder, 
miss, a-being took such care of!  And Tom, he would have been at 
school--and Emma, she would have been left with Mrs. Blinder--and 
me, I should have been here--all a deal sooner, miss; only Mr. 
Jarndyce thought that Tom and Emma and me had better get a little 
used to parting first, we was so small.  Don't cry, if you please, 
miss!"

"I can't help it, Charley."

"No, miss, nor I can't help it," says Charley.  "And if you please, 
miss, Mr. Jarndyce's love, and he thinks you'll like to teach me 
now and then.  And if you please, Tom and Emma and me is to see 
each other once a month.  And I'm so happy and so thankful, miss," 
cried Charley with a heaving heart, "and I'll try to be such a good 
maid!"

"Oh, Charley dear, never forget who did all this!"

"No, miss, I never will.  Nor Tom won't.  Nor yet Emma.  It was all 
you, miss."

"I have known nothing of it.  It was Mr. Jarndyce, Charley."

"Yes, miss, but it was all done for the love of you and that you 
might be my mistress.  If you please, miss, I am a little present 
with his love, and it was all done for the love of you.  Me and Tom 
was to be sure to remember it."

Charley dried her eyes and entered on her functions, going in her 
matronly little way about and about the room and folding up 
everything she could lay her hands upon.  Presently Charley came 
creeping back to my side and said, "Oh, don't cry, if you please, 
miss."

And I said again, "I can't help it, Charley."

And Charley said again, "No, miss, nor I can't help it."  And so, 
after all, I did cry for joy indeed, and so did she.



CHAPTER XXIV

An Appeal Case


As soon as Richard and I had held the conversation of which I have 
given an account, Richard communicated the state of his mind to Mr. 
Jarndyce.  I doubt if my guardian were altogether taken by surprise 
when he received the representation, though it caused him much 
uneasiness and disappointment.  He and Richard were often closeted 
together, late at night and early in the morning, and passed whole 
days in London, and had innumerable appointments with Mr. Kenge, 
and laboured through a quantity of disagreeable business.  While 
they were thus employed, my guardian, though he underwent 
considerable inconvenience from the state of the wind and rubbed 
his head so constantly that not a single hair upon it ever rested 
in its right place, was as genial with Ada and me as at any other 
time, but maintained a steady reserve on these matters.  And as our 
utmost endeavours could only elicit from Richard himself sweeping 
assurances that everything was going on capitally and that it 
really was all right at last, our anxiety was not much relieved by 
him.

We learnt, however, as the time went on, that a new application was 
made to the Lord Chancellor on Richard's behalf as an infant and a 
ward, and I don't know what, and that there was a quantity of 
talking, and that the Lord Chancellor described him in open court 
as a vexatious and capricious infant, and that the matter was 
adjourned and readjourned, and referred, and reported on, and 
petitioned about until Richard began to doubt (as he told us) 
whether, if he entered the army at all, it would not be as a 
veteran of seventy or eighty years of age.  At last an appointment 
was made for him to see the Lord Chancellor again in his private 
room, and there the Lord Chancellor very seriously reproved him for 
trifling with time and not knowing his mind--"a pretty good joke, I 
think," said Richard, "from that quarter!"--and at last it was 
settled that his application should be granted.  His name was 
entered at the Horse Guards as an applicant for an ensign's 
commission; the purchase-money was deposited at an agent's; and 
Richard, in his usual characteristic way, plunged into a violent 
course of military study and got up at five o'clock every morning 
to practise the broadsword exercise.

Thus, vacation succeeded term, and term succeeded vacation.  We 
sometimes heard of Jarndyce and Jarndyce as being in the paper or 
out of the paper, or as being to be mentioned, or as being to be 
spoken to; and it came on, and it went off.  Richard, who was now 
in a professor's house in London, was able to be with us less 
frequently than before; my guardian still maintained the same 
reserve; and so time passed until the commission was obtained and 
Richard received directions with it to join a regiment in Ireland.

He arrived post-haste with the intelligence one evening, and had a 
long conference with my guardian.  Upwards of an hour elapsed 
before my guardian put his head into the room where Ada and I were 
sitting and said, "Come in, my dears!"  We went in and found 
Richard, whom we had last seen in high spirits, leaning on the 
chimney-piece looking mortified and angry.

"Rick and I, Ada," said Mr. Jarndyce, "are not quite of one mind.  
Come, come, Rick, put a brighter face upon it!"

"You are very hard with me, sir," said Richard.  "The harder 
because you have been so considerate to me in all other respects 
and have done me kindnesses that I can never acknowledge.  I never 
could have been set right without you, sir."

"Well, well!" said Mr. Jarndyce.  "I want to set you more right 
yet.  I want to set you more right with yourself."

"I hope you will excuse my saying, sir," returned Richard in a 
fiery way, but yet respectfully, "that I think I am the best judge 
about myself."

"I hope you will excuse my saying, my dear Rick," observed Mr. 
Jarndyce with the sweetest cheerfulness and good humour, "that's 
it's quite natural in you to think so, but I don't think so.  I 
must do my duty, Rick, or you could never care for me in cool 
blood; and I hope you will always care for me, cool and hot."

Ada had turned so pale that he made her sit down in his reading-
chair and sat beside her.

"It's nothing, my dear," he said, "it's nothing.  Rick and I have 
only had a friendly difference, which we must state to you, for you 
are the theme.  Now you are afraid of what's coming."

"I am not indeed, cousin John," replied Ada with a smile, "if it is 
to come from you."

"Thank you, my dear.  Do you give me a minute's calm attention, 
without looking at Rick.  And, little woman, do you likewise.  My 
dear girl," putting his hand on hers as it lay on the side of the 
easy-chair, "you recollect the talk we had, we four when the little 
woman told me of a little love affair?"

"It is not likely that either Richard or I can ever forget your 
kindness that day, cousin John."

"I can never forget it," said Richard.

"And I can never forget it," said Ada.

"So much the easier what I have to say, and so much the easier for 
us to agree," returned my guardian, his face irradiated by the 
gentleness and honour of his heart.  "Ada, my bird, you should know 
that Rick has now chosen his profession for the last time.  All 
that he has of certainty will be expended when he is fully 
equipped.  He has exhausted his resources and is bound henceforward 
to the tree he has planted."

"Quite true that I have exhausted my present resources, and I am 
quite content to know it.  But what I have of certainty, sir," said 
Richard, "is not all I have."

"Rick, Rick!" cried my guardian with a sudden terror in his manner, 
and in an altered voice, and putting up his hands as if he would 
have stopped his ears.  "For the love of God, don't found a hope or 
expectation on the family curse!  Whatever you do on this side the 
grave, never give one lingering glance towards the horrible phantom 
that has haunted us so many years.  Better to borrow, better to 
beg, better to die!"

We were all startled by the fervour of this warning.  Richard bit 
his lip and held his breath, and glanced at me as if he felt, and 
knew that I felt too, how much he needed it.

"Ada, my dear," said Mr. Jarndyce, recovering his cheerfulness, 
"these are strong words of advice, but I live in Bleak House and 
have seen a sight here.  Enough of that.  All Richard had to start 
him in the race of life is ventured.  I recommend to him and you, 
for his sake and your own, that he should depart from us with the 
understanding that there is no sort of contract between you.  I 
must go further.  1 will be plain with you both.  You were to 
confide freely in me, and I will confide freely in you.  I ask you 
wholly to relinquish, for the present, any tie but your 
relationship."

"Better to say at once, sir," returned Richard, "that you renounce 
all confidence in me and that you advise Ada to do the same."

"Better to say nothing of the sort, Rick, because I don't mean it."

"You think I have begun ill, sir," retorted Richard.  "I HAVE, I 
know."

"How I hoped you would begin, and how go on, I told you when we 
spoke of these things last," said Mr. Jarndyce in a cordial and 
encouraging manner.  "You have not made that beginning yet, but 
there is a time for all things, and yours is not gone by; rather, 
it is just now fully come.  Make a clear beginning altogether.  You 
two (very young, my dears) are cousins.  As yet, you are nothing 
more.  What more may come must come of being worked out, Rick, and 
no sooner."

"You are very hard with me, sir," said Richard.  "Harder than I 
could have supposed you would be."

"My dear boy," said Mr. Jarndyce, "I am harder with myself when I 
do anything that gives you pain.  You have your remedy in your own 
hands.  Ada, it is better for him that he should be free and that 
there should be no youthful engagement between you.  Rick, it is 
better for her, much better; you owe it to her.  Come!  Each of you 
will do what is best for the other, if not what is best for 
yourselves."

"Why is it best, sir?" returned Richard hastily.  "It was not when 
we opened our hearts to you.  You did not say so then."

"I have had experience since.  I don't blame you, Rick, but I have 
had experience since."

"You mean of me, sir."

"Well!  Yes, of both of you," said Mr. Jarndyce kindly.  "The time 
is not come for your standing pledged to one another.  It is not 
right, and I must not recognize it.  Come, come, my young cousins, 
begin afresh!  Bygones shall be bygones, and a new page turned for 
you to write your lives in."

Richard gave an anxious glance at Ada but said nothing.

"I have avoided saying one word to either of you or to Esther," 
said Mr. Jarndyce, "until now, in order that we might be open as 
the day, and all on equal terms.  I now affectionately advise, I 
now most earnestly entreat, you two to part as you came here.  
Leave all else to time, truth, and steadfastness.  If you do 
otherwise, you will do wrong, and you will have made me do wrong in 
ever bringing you together."

A long silence succeeded.

"Cousin Richard," said Ada then, raising her blue eyes tenderly to 
his face, "after what our cousin John has said, I think no choice 
is left us.  Your mind may he quite at ease about me, for you will 
leave me here under his care and will be sure that I can have 
nothing to wish for--quite sure if I guide myself by his advice.  
I--I don't doubt, cousin Richard," said Ada, a little confused, 
"that you are very fond of me, and I--I don't think you will fall 
in love with anybody else.  But I should like you to consider well 
about it too, as I should like you to be in all things very happy.  
You may trust in me, cousin Richard.  I am not at all changeable; 
but I am not unreasonable, and should never blame you.  Even 
cousins may be sorry to part; and in truth I am very, very sorry, 
Richard, though I know it's for your welfare.  I shall always think 
of you affectionately, and often talk of you with Esther, and--and 
perhaps you will sometimes think a little of me, cousin Richard.  
So now," said Ada, going up to him and giving him her trembling 
hand, "we are only cousins again, Richard--for the time perhaps--
and I pray for a blessing on my dear cousin, wherever he goes!"

It was strange to me that Richard should not be able to forgive my 
guardian for entertaining the very same opinion of him which he 
himself had expressed of himself in much stronger terms to me.  But 
it was certainly the case.  I observed with great regret that from 
this hour he never was as free and open with Mr. Jarndyce as he had 
been before.  He had every reason given him to be so, but he was 
not; and solely on his side, an estrangement began to arise between 
them.

In the business of preparation and equipment he soon lost himself, 
and even his grief at parting from Ada, who remained in 
Hertfordshire while he, Mr. Jarndyce, and I went up to London for a 
week.  He remembered her by fits and starts, even with bursts of 
tears, and at such times would confide to me the heaviest self-
reproaches.  But in a few minutes he would recklessly conjure up 
some undefinable means by which they were both to be made rich and 
happy for ever, and would become as gay as possible.

It was a busy time, and I trotted about with him all day long, 
buying a variety of things of which he stood in need.  Of the 
things he would have bought if he had been left to his own ways I 
say nothing.  He was perfectly confidential with me, and often 
talked so sensibly and feelingly about his faults and his vigorous 
resolutions, and dwelt so much upon the encouragement he derived 
from these conversations that I could never have been tired if I 
had tried.

There used, in that week, to come backward and forward to our 
lodging to fence with Richard a person who had formerly been a 
cavalry soldier; he was a fine bluff-looking man, of a frank free 
bearing, with whom Richard had practised for some months.  I heard 
so much about him, not only from Richard, but from my guardian too, 
that I was purposely in the room with my work one morning after 
breakfast when he came.

"Good morning, Mr. George," said my guardian, who happened to be 
alone with me.  "Mr. Carstone will be here directly.  Meanwhile, 
Miss Summerson is very happy to see you, I know.  Sit down."

He sat down, a little disconcerted by my presence, I thought, and 
without looking at me, drew his heavy sunburnt hand across and 
across his upper lip.

"You are as punctual as the sun," said Mr. Jarndyce.

"Military time, sir," he replied.  "Force of habit.  A mere habit 
in me, sir.  I am not at all business-like."

"Yet you have a large establishment, too, I am told?" said Mr. 
Jarndyce.

"Not much of a one, sir.  I keep a shooting gallery, but not much 
of a one."

"And what kind of a shot and what kind of a swordsman do you make 
of Mr. Carstone?" said my guardian.

"Pretty good, sir," he replied, folding his arms upon his broad 
chest and looking very large.  "If Mr. Carstone was to give his 
full mind to it, he would come out very good."

"But he don't, I suppose?" said my guardian.

"He did at first, sir, but not afterwards.  Not his full mind.  
Perhaps he has something else upon it--some young lady, perhaps."  
His bright dark eyes glanced at me for the first time.

"He has not me upon his mind, I assure you, Mr. George," said I, 
laughing, "though you seem to suspect me."

He reddened a little through his brown and made me a trooper's bow.  
"No offence, I hope, miss.  I am one of the roughs."

"Not at all," said I.  "I take it as a compliment."

If he had not looked at me before, he looked at me now in three or 
four quick successive glances.  "I beg your pardon, sir," he said 
to my guardian with a manly kind of diffidence, "but you did me the 
honour to mention the young lady's name--"

"Miss Summerson."

"Miss Summerson," he repeated, and looked at me again.

"Do you know the name?" I asked.

"No, miss.  To my knowledge I never heard it.  I thought I had seen 
you somewhere."

"I think not," I returned, raising my head from my work to look at 
him; and there was something so genuine in his speech and manner 
that I was glad of the opportunity.  "I remember faces very well."

"So do I, miss!" he returned, meeting my look with the fullness of 
his dark eyes and broad forehead.  "Humph!  What set me off, now, 
upon that!"

His once more reddening through his brown and being disconcerted by 
his efforts to remember the association brought my guardian to his 
relief.

"Have you many pupils, Mr. George?"

"They vary in their number, sir.  Mostly they're but a small lot to 
live by."

"And what classes of chance people come to practise at your 
gallery?"

"All sorts, sir.  Natives and foreigners.  From gentlemen to 
'prentices.  I have had Frenchwomen come, before now, and show 
themselves dabs at pistol-shooting.  Mad people out of number, of 
course, but THEY go everywhere where the doors stand open."

"People don't come with grudges and schemes of finishing their 
practice with live targets, I hope?" said my guardian, smiling.

"Not much of that, sir, though that HAS happened.  Mostly they come 
for skill--or idleness.  Six of one, and half-a-dozen of the other.  
I beg your pardon," said Mr. George, sitting stiffly upright and 
squaring an elbow on each knee, "but I believe you're a Chancery 
suitor, if I have heard correct?"

"I am sorry to say I am."

"I have had one of YOUR compatriots in my time, sir."

"A Chancery suitor?" returned my guardian.  "How was that?"

"Why, the man was so badgered and worried and tortured by being 
knocked about from post to pillar, and from pillar to post," said 
Mr. George, "that he got out of sorts.  I don't believe he had any 
idea of taking aim at anybody, but he was in that condition of 
resentment and violence that he would come and pay for fifty shots 
and fire away till he was red hot.  One day I said to him when 
there was nobody by and he had been talking to me angrily about his 
wrongs, 'If this practice is a safety-valve, comrade, well and 
good; but I don't altogether like your being so bent upon it in 
your present state of mind; I'd rather you took to something else.'  
I was on my guard for a blow, he was that passionate; but he 
received it in very good part and left off directly.  We shook 
hands and struck up a sort of friendship."

"What was that man?" asked my guardian in a new tone of interest.

"Why, he began by being a small Shropshire farmer before they made 
a baited bull of him," said Mr. George.

"Was his name Gridley?"

"It was, sir."

Mr. George directed another succession of quick bright glances at 
me as my guardian and I exchanged a word or two of surprise at the 
coincidence, and I therefore explained to him how we knew the name.  
He made me another of his soldierly bows in acknowledgment of what 
he called my condescension.

"I don't know," he said as he looked at me, "what it is that sets 
me off again--but--bosh!  What's my head running against!"  He 
passed one of his heavy hands over his crisp dark hair as if to 
sweep the broken thoughts out of his mind and sat a little forward, 
with one arm akimbo and the other resting on his leg, looking in a 
brown study at the ground.

"I am sorry to learn that the same state of mind has got this 
Gridley into new troubles and that he is in hiding," said my 
guardian.

"So I am told, sir," returned Mr. George, still musing and looking 
on the ground.  "So I am told."

"You don't know where?"

"No, sir," returned the trooper, lifting up his eyes and coming out 
of his reverie.  "I can't say anything about him.  He will be worn 
out soon, I expect.  You may file a strong man's heart away for a 
good many years, but it will tell all of a sudden at last."

Richard's entrance stopped the conversation.  Mr. George rose, made 
me another of his soldierly bows, wished my guardian a good day, 
and strode heavily out of the room.

This was the morning of the day appointed for Richard's departure.  
We had no more purchases to make now; I had completed all his 
packing early in the afternoon; and our time was disengaged until 
night, when he was to go to Liverpool for Holyhead.  Jarndyce and 
Jarndyce being again expected to come on that day, Richard proposed 
to me that we should go down to the court and hear what passed.  As 
it was his last day, and he was eager to go, and I had never been 
there, I gave my consent and we walked down to Westminster, where 
the court was then sitting.  We beguiled the way with arrangements 
concerning the letters that Richard was to write to me and the 
letters that I was to write to him and with a great many hopeful 
projects.  My guardian knew where we were going and therefore was 
not with us.

When we came to the court, there was the Lord Chancellor--the same 
whom I had seen in his private room in Lincoln's Inn--sitting in 
great state and gravity on the bench, with the mace and seals on a 
red table below him and an immense flat nosegay, like a little 
garden, which scented the whole court.  Below the table, again, was 
a long row of solicitors, with bundles of papers on the matting at 
their feet; and then there were the gentlemen of the bar in wigs 
and gowns--some awake and some asleep, and one talking, and nobody 
paying much attention to what he said.  The Lord Chancellor leaned 
back in his very easy chair with his elbow on the cushioned arm and 
his forehead resting on his hand; some of those who were present 
dozed; some read the newspapers; some walked about or whispered in 
groups: all seemed perfectly at their ease, by no means in a hurry, 
very unconcerned, and extremely comfortable.

To see everything going on so smoothly and to think of the 
roughness of the suitors' lives and deaths; to see all that full 
dress and ceremony and to think of the waste, and want, and 
beggared misery it represented; to consider that while the sickness 
of hope deferred was raging in so many hearts this polite show went 
calmly on from day to day, and year to year, in such good order and 
composure; to behold the Lord Chancellor and the whole array of 
practitioners under him looking at one another and at the 
spectators as if nobody had ever heard that all over England the 
name in which they were assembled was a bitter jest, was held in 
universal horror, contempt, and indignation, was known for 
something so flagrant and bad that little short of a miracle could 
bring any good out of it to any one--this was so curious and self-
contradictory to me, who had no experience of it, that it was at 
first incredible, and I could not comprehend it.  I sat where 
Richard put me, and tried to listen, and looked about me; but there 
seemed to be no reality in the whole scene except poor little Miss 
Flite, the madwoman, standing on a bench and nodding at it.

Miss Flite soon espied us and came to where we sat.  She gave me a 
gracious welcome to her domain and indicated, with much 
gratification and pride, its principal attractions.  Mr. Kenge also 
came to speak to us and did the honours of the place in much the 
same way, with the bland modesty of a proprietor.  It was not a 
very good day for a visit, he said; he would have preferred the 
first day of term; but it was imposing, it was imposing.

When we had been there half an hour or so, the case in progress--if 
I may use a phrase so ridiculous in such a connexion--seemed to die 
out of its own vapidity, without coming, or being by anybody 
expected to come, to any resuIt.  The Lord Chancellor then threw 
down a bundle of papers from his desk to the gentlemen below him, 
and somebody said, "Jarndyce and Jarndyce."  Upon this there was a 
buzz, and a laugh, and a general withdrawal of the bystanders, and 
a bringing in of great heaps, and piles, and bags and bags full of 
papers.

I think it came on "for further directions"--about some bill of 
costs, to the best of my understanding, which was confused enough.  
But I counted twenty-three gentlemen in wigs who said they were "in 
it," and none of them appeared to understand it much better than I.  
They chatted about it with the Lord Chancellor, and contradicted 
and explained among themselves, and some of them said it was this 
way, and some of them said it was that way, and some of them 
jocosely proposed to read huge volumes of affidavits, and there was 
more buzzing and laughing, and everybody concerned was in a state 
of idle entertainment, and nothing could be made of it by anybody.  
After an hour or so of this, and a good many speeches being begun 
and cut short, it was "referred back for the present," as Mr. Kenge 
said, and the papers were bundled up again before the clerks had 
finished bringing them in.

I glanced at Richard on the termination of these hopeless 
proceedings and was shocked to see the worn look of his handsome 
young face.  "It can't last for ever, Dame Durden.  Better luck 
next time!" was all he said.

I had seen Mr. Guppy bringing in papers and arranging them for Mr. 
Kenge; and he had seen me and made me a forlorn bow, which rendered 
me desirous to get out of the court.  Richard had given me his arm 
and was taking me away when Mr. Guppy came up.

"I beg your pardon, Mr. Carstone," said he in a whisper, "and Miss 
Summerson's also, but there's a lady here, a friend of mine, who 
knows her and wishes to have the pleasure of shaking hands."  As he 
spoke, I saw before me, as if she had started into bodily shape 
from my remembrance, Mrs. Rachael of my godmother's house.

"How do you do, Esther?" said she.  "Do you recollect me?"

I gave her my hand and told her yes and that she was very little 
altered.

"I wonder you remember those times, Esther," she returned with her 
old asperity.  "They are changed now.  Well! I am glad to see you, 
and glad you are not too proud to know me."  But indeed she seemed 
disappointed that I was not.

"Proud, Mrs. Rachael!" I remonstrated.

"I am married, Esther," she returned, coldly correcting me, "and am 
Mrs. Chadband.  Well! I wish you good day, and I hope you'll do 
well."

Mr. Guppy, who had been attentive to this short dialogue, heaved a 
sigh in my ear and elbowed his own and Mrs. Rachael's way through 
the confused little crowd of people coming in and going out, which 
we were in the midst of and which the change in the business had 
brought together.  Richard and I were making our way through it, 
and I was yet in the first chill of the late unexpected recognition 
when I saw, coming towards us, but not seeing us, no less a person 
than Mr. George.  He made nothing of the people about him as he 
tramped on, staring over their heads into the body of the court.

"George!" said Richard as I called his attention to him.

"You are well met, sir," he returned.  "And you, miss.  Could you 
point a person out for me, I want?  I don't understand these 
places."

Turning as he spoke and making an easy way for us, he stopped when 
we were out of the press in a corner behind a great red curtain.

"There's a little cracked old woman," he began, "that--"

I put up my finger, for Miss Flite was close by me, having kept 
beside me all the time and having called the attention of several 
of her legal acquaintance to me (as I had overheard to my 
confusion) by whispering in their ears, "Hush!  Fitz Jarndyce on my 
left!"

"Hem!" said Mr. George.  "You remember, miss, that we passed some 
conversation on a certain man this morning?  Gridley," in a low 
whisper behind his hand.

"Yes," said I.

"He is hiding at my place.  I couldn't mention it.  Hadn't his 
authority.  He is on his last march, miss, and has a whim to see 
her.  He says they can feel for one another, and she has been 
almost as good as a friend to him here.  I came down to look for 
her, for when I sat by Gridley this afternoon, I seemed to hear the 
roll of the muffled drums."

"Shall I tell her?" said I.

"Would you be so good?" he returned with a glance of something like 
apprehension at Miss Flite.  "It's a providence I met you, miss; I 
doubt if I should have known how to get on with that lady."  And he 
put one hand in his breast and stood upright in a martial attitude 
as I informed little Miss Flite, in her ear, of the purport of his 
kind errand.

"My angry friend from Shropshire!  Almost as celebrated as myself!" 
she exclaimed.  "Now really!  My dear, I will wait upon him with 
the greatest pleasure."

"He is living concealed at Mr. George's," said I.  "Hush!  This is 
Mr. George."

"In--deed!" returned Miss Flite.  "Very proud to have the honour!  
A military man, my dear.  You know, a perfect general!" she 
whispered to me.

Poor Miss Flite deemed it necessary to be so courtly and polite, as 
a mark of her respect for the army, and to curtsy so very often 
that it was no easy matter to get her out of the court.  When this 
was at last done, and addressing Mr. George as "General," she gave 
him her arm, to the great entertainment of some idlers who were 
looking on, he was so discomposed and begged me so respectfully 
"not to desert him" that I could not make up my mind to do it, 
especially as Miss Flite was always tractable with me and as she 
too said, "Fitz Jarndyce, my dear, you will accompany us, of 
course."  As Richard seemed quite willing, and even anxious, that 
we should see them safely to their destination, we agreed to do so.  
And as Mr. George informed us that Gridley's mind had run on Mr. 
Jarndyce all the afternoon after hearing of their interview in the 
morning, I wrote a hasty note in pencil to my guardian to say where 
we were gone and why.  Mr. George sealed it at a coffee-house, that 
it might lead to no discovery, and we sent it off by a ticket-
porter.

We then took a hackney-coach and drove away to the neighbourhood of 
Leicester Square.  We walked through some narrow courts, for which 
Mr. George apologized, and soon came to the shooting gallery, the 
door of which was closed.  As he pulled a bell-handle which hung by 
a chain to the door-post, a very respectable old gentleman with 
grey hair, wearing spectacles, and dressed in a black spencer and 
gaiters and a broad-brimmed hat, and carrying a large gold-beaded 
cane, addressed him.

"I ask your pardon, my good friend," said he, "but is this George's 
Shooting Gallery?"

"It is, sir," returned Mr. George, glancing up at the great letters 
in which that inscription was painted on the whitewashed wall.

"Oh! To be sure!" said the old gentleman, following his eyes.  
"Thank you.  Have you rung the bell?"

"My name is George, sir, and I have rung the bell."

"Oh, indeed?" said the old gentleman.  "Your name is George?  Then 
I am here as soon as you, you see.  You came for me, no doubt?"

"No, sir.  You have the advantage of me."

"Oh, indeed?" said the old gentleman.  "Then it was your young man 
who came for me.  I am a physician and was requested--five minutes 
ago--to come and visit a sick man at George's Shooting Gallery."

"The muffled drums," said Mr. George, turning to Richard and me and 
gravely shaking his head.  "It's quite correct, sir.  Will you 
please to walk in."

The door being at that moment opened by a very singular-looking 
little man in a green-baize cap and apron, whose face and hands and 
dress were blackened all over, we passed along a dreary passage 
into a large building with bare brick walls where there were 
targets, and guns, and swords, and other things of that kind.  When 
we had all arrived here, the physician stopped, and taking off his 
hat, appeared to vanish by magic and to leave another and quite a 
different man in his place.

"Now lookee here, George," said the man, turning quickly round upon 
him and tapping him on the breast with a large forefinger.  "You 
know me, and I know you.  You're a man of the world, and I'm a man 
of the world.  My name's Bucket, as you are aware, and I have got a 
peace-warrant against Gridley.  You have kept him out of the way a 
long time, and you have been artful in it, and it does you credit."

Mr. George, looking hard at him, bit his lip and shook his head.

"Now, George," said the other, keeping close to him, "you're a 
sensible man and a well-conducted man; that's what YOU are, beyond 
a doubt.  And mind you, I don't talk to you as a common character, 
because you have served your country and you know that when duty 
calls we must obey.  Consequently you're very far from wanting to 
give trouble.  If I required assistance, you'd assist me; that's 
what YOU'D do.  Phil Squod, don't you go a-sidling round the 
gallery like that"--the dirty little man was shuffling about with 
his shoulder against the wall, and his eyes on the intruder, in a 
manner that looked threatening--"because I know you and won't have 
it."

"Phil!" said Mr. George.

"Yes, guv'ner."

"Be quiet."

The little man, with a low growl, stood still.

"Ladies and gentlemen," said Mr. Bucket, "you'll excuse anything 
that may appear to be disagreeable in this, for my name's Inspector 
Bucket of the Detective, and I have a duty to perform.  George, I 
know where my man is because I was on the roof last night and saw 
him through the skylight, and you along with him.  He is in there, 
you know," pointing; "that's where HE is--on a sofy.  Now I must 
see my man, and I must tell my man to consider himself in custody; 
but you know me, and you know I don't want to take any 
uncomfortable measures.  You give me your word, as from one man to 
another (and an old soldier, mind you, likewise), that it's 
honourable between us two, and I'll accommodate you to the utmost 
of my power."

"I give it," was the reply.  '"But it wasn't handsome in you, Mr. 
Bucket."

"Gammon, George!  Not handsome?" said Mr. Bucket, tapping him on 
his broad breast again and shaking hands with him.  "I don't say it 
wasn't handsome in you to keep my man so close, do I?  Be equally 
good-tempered to me, old boy!  Old William Tell, Old Shaw, the Life 
Guardsman!  Why, he's a model of the whole British army in himself, 
ladies and gentlemen.  I'd give a fifty-pun' note to be such a 
figure of a man!"

The affair being brought to this head, Mr. George, after a little 
consideration, proposed to go in first to his comrade (as he called 
him), taking Miss Flite with him.  Mr. Bucket agreeing, they went 
away to the further end of the gallery, leaving us sitting and 
standing by a table covered with guns.  Mr. Bucket took this 
opportunity of entering into a little light conversation, asking me 
if I were afraid of fire-arms, as most young ladies were; asking 
Richard if he were a good shot; asking Phil Squod which he 
considered the best of those rifles and what it might be worth 
first-hand, telling him in return that it was a pity he ever gave 
way to his temper, for he was naturally so amiable that he might 
have been a young woman, and making himself generally agreeable.

After a time he followed us to the further end of the gallery, and 
Richard and I were going quietly away when Mr. George came after 
us.  He said that if we had no objection to see his comrade, he 
would take a visit from us very kindly.  The words had hardly 
passed his lips when the bell was rung and my guardian appeared, 
"on the chance," he slightly observed, "of being able to do any 
little thing for a poor fellow involved in the same misfortune as 
himself."  We all four went back together and went into the place 
where Gridley was.

It was a bare room, partitioned off from the gallery with unpainted 
wood.  As the screening was not more than eight or ten feet high 
and only enclosed the sides, not the top, the rafters of the high 
gallery roof were overhead, and the skylight through which Mr. 
Bucket had looked down.  The sun was low--near setting--and its 
light came redly in above, without descending to the ground.  Upon 
a plain canvas-covered sofa lay the man from Shropshire, dressed 
much as we had seen him last, but so changed that at first I 
recognized no likeness in his colourless face to what I 
recollected.

He had been still writing in his hiding-place, and still dwelling 
on his grievances, hour after hour.  A table and some shelves were 
covered with manuscript papers and with worn pens and a medley of 
such tokens.  Touchingly and awfully drawn together, he and the 
little mad woman were side by side and, as it were, alone.  She sat 
on a chair holding his hand, and none of us went close to them.

His voice had faded, with the old expression of his face, with his 
strength, with his anger, with his resistance to the wrongs that 
had at last subdued him.  The faintest shadow of an object full of 
form and colour is such a picture of it as he was of the man from 
Shropshire whom we had spoken with before.

He inclined his head to Richard and me and spoke to my guardian.

"Mr. Jarndyce, it is very kind of you to come to see me.  I am not 
long to be seen, I think.  I am very glad to take your hand, sir.  
You are a good man, superior to injustice, and God knows I honour 
you."

They shook hands earnestly, and my guardian said some words of 
comfort to him.

"It may seem strange to you, sir," returned Gridley; "I should not 
have liked to see you if this had been the flrst time of our 
meeting.  But you know I made a fight for it, you know I stood up 
with my single hand against them all, you know I told them the 
truth to the last, and told them what they were, and what they had 
done to me; so I don't mind your seeing me, this wreck."

"You have been courageous with them many and many a time," returned 
my guardian.

"Sir, I have been," with a faint smile.  "I told you what would 
come of it when I ceased to be so, and see here!  Look at us--look 
at us!"  He drew the hand Miss Flite held through her arm and 
brought her something nearer to him.

"This ends it.  Of all my old associations, of all my old pursuits 
and hopes, of all the living and the dead world, this one poor soul 
alone comes natural to me, and I am fit for.  There is a tie of 
many suffering years between us two, and it is the only tie I ever 
had on earth that Chancery has not broken."

"Accept my blessing, Gridley," said Miss Flite in tears.  "Accept 
my blessing!"

"I thought, boastfully, that they never could break my heart, Mr. 
Jarndyce.  I was resolved that they should not.  I did believe that 
I could, and would, charge them with being the mockery they were 
until I died of some bodily disorder.  But I am worn out.  How long 
I have been wearing out, I don't know; I seemed to break down in an 
hour.  I hope they may never come to hear of it.  I hope everybody 
here will lead them to believe that I died defying them, 
consistently and perseveringly, as I did through so many years."

Here Mr. Bucket, who was sitting in a corner by the door, good-
naturedly offered such consolation as he could administer.

"Come, come!" he said from his corner.  "Don't go on in that way, 
Mr. Gridley.  You are only a little low.  We are all of us a little 
low sometimes.  I am.  Hold up, hold up!  You'll lose your temper 
with the whole round of 'em, again and again; and I shall take you 
on a score of warrants yet, if I have luck."

He only shook his head.

"Don't shake your head," said Mr. Bucket.  "Nod it; that's what I 
want to see you do.  Why, Lord bless your soul, what times we have 
had together!  Haven't I seen you in the Fleet over and over again 
for contempt?  Haven't I come into court, twenty afternoons for no 
other purpose than to see you pin the Chancellor like a bull-dog?  
Don't you remember when you first began to threaten the lawyers, 
and the peace was sworn against you two or three times a week?  Ask 
the little old lady there; she has been always present.  Hold up, 
Mr. Gridley, hold up, sir!"

"What are you going to do about him?" asked George in a low voice.

"I don't know yet," said Bucket in the same tone.  Then resuming 
his encouragement, he pursued aloud: "Worn out, Mr. Gridley?  After 
dodging me for all these weeks and forcing me to climb the roof 
here like a tom cat and to come to see you as a doctor?  That ain't 
like being worn out.  I should think not!  Now I tell you what you 
want.  You want excitement, you know, to keep YOU up; that's what 
YOU want.  You're used to it, and you can't do without it.  I 
couldn't myself.  Very well, then; here's this warrant got by Mr. 
Tulkinghorn of Lincoln's Inn Fields, and backed into half-a-dozen 
counties since.  What do you say to coming along with me, upon this 
warrant, and having a good angry argument before the magistrates?  
It'll do you good; it'll freshen you up and get you into training 
for another turn at the Chancellor.  Give in?  Why, I am surprised 
to hear a man of your energy talk of giving in.  You mustn't do 
that.  You're half the fun of the fair in the Court of Chancery.  
George, you lend Mr. Gridley a hand, and let's see now whether he 
won't be better up than down."

"He is very weak," said the trooper in a low voice.

"Is he?" returned Bucket anxiously.  "I only want to rouse him.  I 
don't like to see an old acquaintance giving in like this.  It 
would cheer him up more than anything if I could make him a little 
waxy with me.  He's welcome to drop into me, right and left, if he 
likes.  I shall never take advantage of it."

The roof rang with a scream from Miss Flite, which still rings in 
my ears.

"Oh, no, Gridley!" she cried as he fell heavily and calmly back 
from before her.  "Not without my blessing.  After so many years!"

The sun was down, the light had gradually stolen from the roof, and 
the shadow had crept upward.  But to me the shadow of that pair, 
one living and one dead, fell heavier on Richard's departure than 
the darkness of the darkest night.  And through Richard's farewell 
words I heard it echoed: "Of all my old associations, of all my old 
pursuits and hopes, of all the living and the dead world, this one 
poor soul alone comes natural to me, and I am fit for.  There is a 
tie of many suffering years between us two, and it is the only tie 
I ever had on earth that Chancery has not broken!"



CHAPTER XXV

Mrs. Snagsby Sees It All


There is disquietude in Cook's Court, Cursitor Street.  Black 
suspicion hides in that peaceful region.  The mass of Cook's 
Courtiers are in their usual state of mind, no better and no worse; 
but Mr. Snagsby is changed, and his little woman knows it.

For Tom-all-Alone's and Lincoln's Inn Fields persist in harnessing 
themselves, a pair of ungovernable coursers, to the chariot of Mr. 
Snagsby's imagination; and Mr. Bucket drives; and the passengers 
are Jo and Mr. Tulkinghorn; and the complete equipage whirls though 
the law-stationery business at wild speed all round the clock.  
Even in the little front kitchen where the family meals are taken, 
it rattles away at a smoking pace from the dinner-table, when Mr. 
Snagsby pauses in carving the first slice of the leg of mutton 
baked with potatoes and stares at the kitchen wall.

Mr. Snagsby cannot make out what it is that he has had to do with.  
Something is wrong somewhere, but what something, what may come of 
it, to whom, when, and from which unthought of and unheard of 
quarter is the puzzle of his life.  His remote impressions of the 
robes and coronets, the stars and garters, that sparkle through the 
surface-dust of Mr. Tulkinghorn's chambers; his veneration for the 
mysteries presided over by that best and closest of his customers, 
whom all the Inns of Court, all Chancery Lane, and all the legal 
neighbourhood agree to hold in awe; his remembrance of Detective 
Mr. Bucket with his forefinger and his confidential manner, 
impossible to be evaded or declined, persuade him that he is a 
party to some dangerous secret without knowing what it is.  And it 
is the fearful peculiarity of this condition that, at any hour of 
his daily life, at any opening of the shop-door, at any pull of the 
bell, at any entrance of a messenger, or any delivery of a letter, 
the secret may take air and fire, explode, and blow up--Mr. Bucket 
only knows whom.

For which reason, whenever a man unknown comes into the shop (as 
many men unknown do) and says, "Is Mr. Snagsby in?" or words to 
that innocent effect, Mr. Snagsby's heart knocks hard at his guilty 
breast.  He undergoes so much from such inquiries that when they 
are made by boys he revenges himself by flipping at their ears over 
the counter and asking the young dogs what they mean by it and why 
they can't speak out at once?  More impracticable men and boys 
persist in walking into Mr. Snagsby's sleep and terrifying him with 
unaccountable questions, so that often when the cock at the little 
dairy in Cursitor Street breaks out in his usual absurd way about 
the morning, Mr. Snagsby finds himself in a crisis of nightmare, 
with his little woman shaking him and saying "What's the matter 
with the man!"

The little woman herself is not the least item in his difficulty.  
To know that he is always keeping a secret from her, that he has 
under all circumstances to conceal and hold fast a tender double 
tooth, which her sharpness is ever ready to twist out of his head, 
gives Mr. Snagsby, in her dentistical presence, much of the air of 
a dog who has a reservation from his master and will look anywhere 
rather than meet his eye.

These various signs and tokens, marked by the little woman, are not 
lost upon her.  They impel her to say, "Snagsby has something on 
his mind!"  And thus suspicion gets into Cook's Court, Cursitor 
Street.  From suspicion to jealousy, Mrs. Snagsby finds the road as 
natural and short as from Cook's Court to Chancery Lane.  And thus 
jealousy gets into Cook's Court, Cursitor Street.  Once there (and 
it was always lurking thereabout), it is very active and nimble in 
Mrs. Snagsby's breast, prompting her to nocturnal examinations of 
Mr. Snagsby's pockets; to secret perusals of Mr. Snagsby's letters; 
to private researches in the day book and ledger, till, cash-box, 
and iron safe; to watchings at windows, listenings behind doors, 
and a general putting of this and that together by the wrong end.

Mrs. Snagsby is so perpetually on the alert that the house becomes 
ghostly with creaking boards and rustling garments.  The 'prentices 
think somebody may have been murdered there in bygone times.  
Guster holds certain loose atoms of an idea (picked up at Tooting, 
where they were found floating among the orphans) that there is 
buried money underneath the cellar, guarded by an old man with a 
white beard, who cannot get out for seven thousand years because he 
said the Lord's Prayer backwards.

"Who was Nimrod?" Mrs. Snagsby repeatedly inquires of herself.  
"Who was that lady--that creature?  And who is that boy?"  Now, 
Nimrod being as dead as the mighty hunter whose name Mrs. Snagsby 
has appropriated, and the lady being unproducible, she directs her 
mental eye, for the present, with redoubled vigilance to the boy.  
"And who," quoth Mrs. Snagsby for the thousand and first time, "is 
that boy?  Who is that--!"  And there Mrs. Snagsby is seized with 
an inspiration.

He has no respect for Mr. Chadband.  No, to be sure, and he 
wouldn't have, of course.  Naturally he wouldn't, under those 
contagious circumstances.  He was invited and appointed by Mr. 
Chadband--why, Mrs. Snagsby heard it herself with her own ears!--to 
come back, and be told where he was to go, to be addressed by Mr. 
Chadband; and he never came!  Why did he never come?  Because he 
was told not to come.  Who told him not to come?  Who?  Ha, ha!  
Mrs. Snagsby sees it all.

But happily (and Mrs. Snagsby tightly shakes her head and tightly 
smiles) that boy was met by Mr. Chadband yesterday in the streets; 
and that boy, as affording a subject which Mr. Chadband desires to 
improve for the spiritual delight of a select congregation, was 
seized by Mr. Chadband and threatened with being delivered over to 
the police unless he showed the reverend gentleman where he lived 
and unless he entered into, and fulfilled, an undertaking to appear 
in Cook's Court to-morrow night, "'to--mor--row--night," Mrs. 
Snagsby repeats for mere emphasis with another tight smile and 
another tight shake of her head; and to-morrow night that boy will 
be here, and to-morrow night Mrs. Snagsby will have her eye upon 
him and upon some one else; and oh, you may walk a long while in 
your secret ways (says Mrs. Snagsby with haughtiness and scorn), 
but you can't blind ME!

Mrs. Snagsby sounds no timbrel in anybody's ears, but holds her 
purpose quietly, and keeps her counsel.  To-morrow comes, the 
savoury preparations for the Oil Trade come, the evening comes.  
Comes Mr. Snagsby in his black coat; come the Chadbands; come (when 
the gorging vessel is replete) the 'prentices and Guster, to be 
edified; comes at last, with his slouching head, and his shuflle 
backward, and his shuffle forward, and his shuffle to the right, 
and his shuffle to the left, and his bit of fur cap in his muddy 
hand, which he picks as if it were some mangy bird he had caught 
and was plucking before eating raw, Jo, the very, very tough 
subject Mr. Chadband is to improve.

Mrs. Snagsby screws a watchful glance on Jo as he is brought into 
the little drawing-room by Guster.  He looks at Mr. Snagsby the 
moment he comes in.  Aha!  Why does he look at Mr. Snagsby?  Mr. 
Snagsby looks at him.  Why should he do that, but that Mrs. Snagsby 
sees it all?  Why else should that look pass between them, why else 
should Mr. Snagsby be confused and cough a signal cough behind his 
hand?  It is as clear as crystal that Mr. Snagsby is that boy's 
father.

'"Peace, my friends," says Chadband, rising and wiping the oily 
exudations from his reverend visage.  "Peace be with us!  My 
friends, why with us?  Because," with his fat smile, "it cannot be 
against us, because it must be for us; because it is not hardening, 
because it is softening; because it does not make war like the 
hawk, but comes home unto us like the dove.  Therefore, my friends, 
peace be with us!  My human boy, come forward!"

Stretching forth his flabby paw, Mr. Chadband lays the same on Jo's 
arm and considers where to station him.  Jo, very doubtful of his 
reverend friend's intentions and not at all clear but that 
something practical and painful is going to be done to him, 
mutters, "You let me alone.  I never said nothink to you.  You let 
me alone."

"No, my young friend," says Chadband smoothly, "I will not let you 
alone.  And why?  Because I am a harvest-labourer, because I am a 
toiler and a moiler, because you are delivered over unto me and are 
become as a precious instrument in my hands.  My friends, may I so 
employ this instrument as to use it to your advantage, to your 
profit, to your gain, to your welfare, to your enrichment!  My 
young friend, sit upon this stool."

Jo, apparently possessed by an impression that the reverend 
gentleman wants to cut his hair, shields his head with both arms 
and is got into the required position with great difficulty and 
every possible manifestation of reluctance.

When he is at last adjusted like a lay-figure, Mr. Chadband, 
retiring behind the table, holds up his bear's-paw and says, "My 
friends!"  This is the signal for a general settlement of the 
audience.  The 'prentices giggle internally and nudge each other.  
Guster falls into a staring and vacant state, compounded of a 
stunned admiration of Mr. Chadband and pity for the friendless 
outcast whose condition touches her nearly.  Mrs. Snagsby silently 
lays trains of gunpowder.  Mrs. Chadband composes herself grimly by 
the fire and warms her knees, finding that sensation favourable to 
the reception of eloquence.

It happens that Mr. Chadband has a pulpit habit of fixing some 
member of his congregation with his eye and fatly arguing his 
points with that particular person, who is understood to be 
expected to be moved to an occasional grunt, groan, gasp, or other 
audible expression of inward working, which expression of inward 
working, being echoed by some elderly lady in the next pew and so 
communicated like a game of forfeits through a circle of the more 
fermentable sinners present, serves the purpose of parliamentary 
cheering and gets Mr. Chadband's steam up.  From mere force of 
habit, Mr. Chadband in saying "My friends!" has rested his eye on 
Mr. Snagsby and proceeds to make that ill-starred stationer, 
already sufficiently confused, the immediate recipient of his 
discourse.

"We have here among us, my friends," says Chadband, "a Gentile and 
a heathen, a dweller in the tents of Tom-all-Alone's and a mover-on 
upon the surface of the earth.  We have here among us, my friends," 
and Mr. Chadband, untwisting the point with his dirty thumb-nail, 
bestows an oily smile on Mr. Snagsby, signifying that he will throw 
him an argumentative back-fall presently if he be not already down, 
"a brother and a boy.  Devoid of parents, devoid of relations, 
devoid of flocks and herds, devoid of gold and silver and of 
precious stones.  Now, my friends, why do I say he is devoid of 
these possessions?  Why?  Why is he?"  Mr. Chadband states the 
question as if he were propoundlng an entirely new riddle of much 
ingenuity and merit to Mr. Snagsby and entreating him not to give 
it up.

Mr. Snagsby, greatly perplexed by the mysterious look he received 
just now from his little woman--at about the period when Mr. 
Chadband mentioned the word parents--is tempted into modestly 
remarking, "I don't know, I'm sure, sir."  On which interruption 
Mrs. Chadband glares and Mrs. Snagsby says, "For shame!"

"I hear a voice," says Chadband; "is it a still small voice, my 
friends?  I fear not, though I fain would hope so--"

"Ah--h!" from Mrs. Snagsby.

"Which says, 'I don't know.'  Then I will tell you why.  I say this 
brother present here among us is devoid of parents, devoid of 
relations, devoid of flocks and herds, devoid of gold, of silver, 
and of precious stones because he is devoid of the light that 
shines in upon some of us.  What is that light?  What is it?  I ask 
you, what is that light?"

Mr. Chadband draws back his head and pauses, but Mr. Snagsby is not 
to be lured on to his destruction again.  Mr. Chadband, leaning 
forward over the table, pierces what he has got to follow directly 
into Mr. Snagsby with the thumb-nail already mentioned.

"It is," says Chadband, "the ray of rays, the sun of suns, the moon 
of moons, the star of stars.  It is the light of Terewth."

Mr. Chadband draws himself up again and looks triumphantly at Mr. 
Snagsby as if he would be glad to know how he feels after that.

"Of Terewth," says Mr. Chadband, hitting him again.  "Say not to me 
that it is NOT the lamp of lamps.  I say to you it is.  I say to 
you, a million of times over, it is.  It is!  I say to you that I 
will proclaim it to you, whether you like it or not; nay, that the 
less you like it, the more I will proclaim it to you.  With a 
speaking-trumpet!  I say to you that if you rear yourself against 
it, you shall fall, you shall be bruised, you shall be battered, 
you shall be flawed, you shall be smashed."

The present effect of this flight of oratory--much admired for its 
general power by Mr. Chadband's followers--being not only to make 
Mr. Chadband unpleasantly warm, but to represent the innocent Mr. 
Snagsby in the light of a determined enemy to virtue, with a 
forehead of brass and a heart of adamant, that unfortunate 
tradesman becomes yet more disconcerted and is in a very advanced 
state of low spirits and false position when Mr. Chadband 
accidentally finishes him.

"My friends," he resumes after dabbing his fat head for some time--
and it smokes to such an extent that he seems to light his pocket-
handkerchief at it, which smokes, too, after every dab--"to pursue 
the subject we are endeavouring with our lowly gifts to improve, 
let us in a spirit of love inquire what is that Terewth to which I 
have alluded.  For, my young friends," suddenly addressing the 
'prentices and Guster, to their consternation, "if I am told by the 
doctor that calomel or castor-oil is good for me, I may naturally 
ask what is calomel, and what is castor-oil.  I may wish to be 
informed of that before I dose myself with either or with both.  
Now, my young friends, what is this Terewth then?  Firstly (in a 
spirit of love), what is the common sort of Terewth--the working 
clothes--the every-day wear, my young friends?  Is it deception?"

"Ah--h!" from Mrs. Snagsby.

"Is it suppression?"

A shiver in the negative from Mrs. Snagsby.

"Is it reservation?"

A shake of the head from Mrs. Snagsby--very long and very tight.

"No, my friends, it is neither of these.  Neither of these names 
belongs to it.  When this young heathen now among us--who is now, 
my friends, asleep, the seal of indifference and perdition being 
set upon his eyelids; but do not wake him, for it is right that I 
should have to wrestle, and to combat and to struggle, and to 
conquer, for his sake--when this young hardened heathen told us a 
story of a cock, and of a bull, and of a lady, and of a sovereign, 
was THAT the Terewth?  No.  Or if it was partly, was it wholly and 
entirely?  No, my friends, no!"

If Mr. Snagsby could withstand his little woman's look as it enters 
at his eyes, the windows of his soul, and searches the whole 
tenement, he were other than the man he is.  He cowers and droops.

"Or, my juvenile friends," says Chadband, descending to the level 
of their comprehension with a very obtrusive demonstration in his 
greasily meek smile of coming a long way downstairs for the 
purpose, "if the master of this house was to go forth into the city 
and there see an eel, and was to come back, and was to call unto 
him the mistress of this house, and was to say, 'Sarah, rejoice 
with me, for I have seen an elephant!' would THAT be Terewth?"

Mrs. Snagsby in tears.

"Or put it, my juvenile friends, that he saw an elephant, and 
returning said 'Lo, the city is barren, I have seen but an eel,' 
would THAT be Terewth?"

Mrs. Snagsby sobbing loudly.

"Or put it, my juvenile friends," said Chadband, stimulated by the 
sound, "that the unnatural parents of this slumbering heathen--for 
parents he had, my juvenile friends, beyond a doubt--after casting 
him forth to the wolves and the vultures, and the wild dogs and the 
young gazelles, and the serpents, went back to their dwellings and 
had their pipes, and their pots, and their flutings and their 
dancings, and their malt liquors, and their butcher's meat and 
poultry, would THAT be Terewth?"

Mrs. Snagsby replies by delivering herself a prey to spasms, not an 
unresisting prey, but a crying and a tearing one, so that Cook's 
Court re-echoes with her shrieks.  Finally, becoming cataleptic, 
she has to be carried up the narrow staircase like a grand piano.  
After unspeakable suffering, productive of the utmost 
consternation, she is pronounced, by expresses from the bedroom, 
free from pain, though much exhausted, in which state of affairs 
Mr. Snagsby, trampled and crushed in the piano-forte removal, and 
extremely timid and feeble, ventures to come out from behind the 
door in the drawing-room.

All this time Jo has been standing on the spot where he woke up, 
ever picking his cap and putting bits of fur in his mouth.  He 
spits them out with a remorseful air, for he feels that it is in 
his nature to be an unimprovable reprobate and that it's no good 
HIS trying to keep awake, for HE won't never know nothink.  Though 
it may be, Jo, that there is a history so interesting and affecting 
even to minds as near the brutes as thine, recording deeds done on 
this earth for common men, that if the Chadbands, removing their 
own persons from the light, would but show it thee in simple 
reverence, would but leave it unimproved, would but regard it as 
being eloquent enough without their modest aid--it might hold thee 
awake, and thou might learn from it yet!

Jo never heard of any such book.  Its compilers and the Reverend 
Chadband are all one to him, except that he knows the Reverend 
Chadband and would rather run away from him for an hour than hear 
him talk for five minutes.  "It an't no good my waiting here no 
longer," thinks Jo.  "Mr. Snagsby an't a-going to say nothink to me 
to-night."  And downstairs he shuffles.

But downstairs is the charitable Guster, holding by the handrail of 
the kitchen stairs and warding off a fit, as yet doubtfully, the 
same having been induced by Mrs. Snagsby's screaming.  She has her 
own supper of bread and cheese to hand to Jo, with whom she 
ventures to interchange a word or so for the first time.

"Here's something to eat, poor boy," says Guster.

"Thank'ee, mum," says Jo.

"Are you hungry?"

"Jist!" says Jo.

"What's gone of your father and your mother, eh?"

Jo stops in the middle of a bite and looks petrified.  For this 
orphan charge of the Christian saint whose shrine was at Tooting 
has patted him on the shoulder, and it is the first time in his 
life that any decent hand has been so laid upon him.

"I never know'd nothink about 'em," says Jo.

"No more didn't I of mine," cries Guster.  She is repressing 
symptoms favourable to the fit when she seems to take alarm at 
something and vanishes down the stairs.

"Jo," whispers the law-stationer softly as the boy lingers on the 
step.

"Here I am, Mr. Snagsby!"

"I didn't know you were gone--there's another half-crown, Jo.  It 
was quite right of you to say nothing about the lady the other 
night when we were out together.  It would breed trouble.  You 
can't be too quiet, Jo."

"I am fly, master!"

And so, good night.

A ghostly shade, frilled and night-capped, follows the law-
stationer to the room he came from and glides higher up.  And 
henceforth he begins, go where he will, to be attended by another 
shadow than his own, hardly less constant than his own, hardly less 
quiet than his own.  And into whatsoever atmosphere of secrecy his 
own shadow may pass, let all concerned in the secrecy beware!  For 
the watchful Mrs. Snagsby is there too--bone of his bone, flesh of 
his flesh, shadow of his shadow.



CHAPTER XXVI

Sharpshooters


Wintry morning, looking with dull eyes and sallow face upon the 
neighbourhood of Leicester Square, finds its inhabitants unwilling 
to get out of bed.  Many of them are not early risers at the 
brightest of times, being birds of night who roost when the sun is 
high and are wide awake and keen for prey when the stars shine out.  
Behind dingy blind and curtain, in upper story and garret, skulking 
more or less under false names, false hair, false titles, false 
jewellery, and false histories, a colony of brigands lie in their 
first sleep.  Gentlemen of the green-baize road who could discourse 
from personal experience of foreign galleys and home treadmills; 
spies of strong governments that eternally quake with weakness and 
miserable fear, broken traitors, cowards, bullies, gamesters, 
shufflers, swindlers, and false witnesses; some not unmarked by the 
branding-iron beneath their dirty braid; all with more cruelty in 
them than was in Nero, and more crime than is in Newgate.  For 
howsoever bad the devil can be in fustian or smock-frock (and he 
can be very bad in both), he is a more designing, callous, and 
intolerable devil when he sticks a pin in his shirt-front, calls 
himself a gentleman, backs a card or colour, plays a game or so of 
billiards, and knows a little about bills and promissory notes than 
in any other form he wears.  And in such form Mr. Bucket shall find 
him, when he will, still pervading the tributary channels of 
Leicester Square.

But the wintry morning wants him not and wakes him not.  It wakes 
Mr. George of the shooting gallery and his familiar.  They arise, 
roll up and stow away their mattresses.  Mr. George, having shaved 
himself before a looking-glass of minute proportions, then marches 
out, bare-headed and bare-chested, to the pump in the little yard 
and anon comes back shining with yellow soap, friction, drifting 
rain, and exceedingly cold water.  As he rubs himself upon a large 
jack-towel, blowing like a military sort of diver just come up, his 
hair curling tighter and tighter on his sunburnt temples the more 
he rubs it so that it looks as if it never could be loosened by any 
less coercive instrument than an iron rake or a curry-comb--as he 
rubs, and puffs, and polishes, and blows, turning his head from 
side to side the more conveniently to excoriate his throat, and 
standing with his body well bent forward to keep the wet from his 
martial legs, Phil, on his knees lighting a fire, looks round as if 
it were enough washing for him to see all that done, and sufficient 
renovation for one day to take in the superfluous health his master 
throws off.

When Mr. George is dry, he goes to work to brush his head with two 
hard brushes at once, to that unmerciful degree that Phil, 
shouldering his way round the gallery in the act of sweeping it, 
winks with sympathy.  This chafing over, the ornamental part of Mr. 
George's toilet is soon performed.  He fills his pipe, lights it, 
and marches up and down smoking, as his custom is, while Phil, 
raising a powerful odour of hot rolls and coffee, prepares 
breakfast.  He smokes gravely and marches in slow time.  Perhaps 
this morning's pipe is devoted to the memory of Gridley in his 
grave.

"And so, Phil," says George of the shooting gallery after several 
turns in silence, "you were dreaming of the country last night?"

Phil, by the by, said as much in a tone of surprise as he scrambled 
out of bed.

"Yes, guv'ner."

"What was it like?"

"I hardly know what it was like, guv'ner," said Phil, considering.

"How did you know it was the country?"

"On account of the grass, I think.  And the swans upon it," says 
Phil after further consideration.

"What were the swans doing on the grass?"

"They was a-eating of it, I expect," says Phil.

The master resumes his march, and the man resumes his preparation 
of breakfast.  It is not necessarily a lengthened preparation, 
being limited to the setting forth of very simple breakfast 
requisites for two and the broiling of a rasher of bacon at the 
fire in the rusty grate; but as Phil has to sidle round a 
considerable part of the gallery for every object he wants, and 
never brings two objects at once, it takes time under the 
circumstances.  At length the breakfast is ready.  Phil announcing 
it, Mr. George knocks the ashes out of his pipe on the hob, stands 
his pipe itself in the chimney corner, and sits down to the meal.  
When he has helped himself, Phil follows suit, sitting at the 
extreme end of the little oblong table and taking his plate on his 
knees.  Either in humility, or to hide his blackened hands, or 
because it is his natural manner of eating.

"The country," says Mr. George, plying his knife and fork; "why, I 
suppose you never clapped your eyes on the country, Phil?"

"I see the marshes once," says Phil, contentedly eating his 
breakfast.

"What marshes?"

"THE marshes, commander," returns Phil.

"Where are they?"

"I don't know where they are," says Phil; "but I see 'em, guv'ner.  
They was flat.  And miste."

Governor and commander are interchangeable terms with Phil, 
expressive of the same respect and deference and applicable to 
nobody but Mr. George.

"I was born in the country, Phil."

"Was you indeed, commander?"

"Yes.  And bred there."

Phil elevates his one eyebrow, and after respectfully staring at 
his master to express interest, swallows a great gulp of coffee, 
still staring at him.

"There's not a bird's note that I don't know," says Mr. George.  
"Not many an English leaf or berry that I couldn't name.  Not many 
a tree that I couldn't climb yet if I was put to it.  I was a real 
country boy, once.  My good mother lived in the country."

"She must have been a fine old lady, guv'ner," Phil observes.

"Aye! And not so old either, five and thirty years ago," says Mr. 
George.  "But I'll wager that at ninety she would be near as 
upright as me, and near as broad across the shoulders."

"Did she die at ninety, guv'ner?" inquires Phil.

"No.  Bosh! Let her rest in peace, God bless her!" says the 
trooper.  "What set me on about country boys, and runaways, and 
good-for-nothings?  You, to be sure!  So you never clapped your 
eyes upon the country--marshes and dreams excepted.  Eh?"

Phil shakes his head.

"Do you want to see it?"

"N-no, I don't know as I do, particular," says Phil.

"The town's enough for you, eh?"

"Why, you see, commander," says Phil, "I ain't acquainted with 
anythink else, and I doubt if I ain't a-getting too old to take to 
novelties."

"How old ARE you, Phil?" asks the trooper, pausing as he conveys 
his smoking saucer to his lips.

"I'm something with a eight in it," says Phil.  "It can't be 
eighty.  Nor yet eighteen.  It's betwixt 'em, somewheres."

Mr. George, slowly putting down his saucer without tasting its 
contents, is laughingly beginning, "Why, what the deuce, Phil--" 
when he stops, seeing that Phil is counting on his dirty fingers.

"I was just eight," says Phil, "agreeable to the parish 
calculation, when I went with the tinker.  I was sent on a errand, 
and I see him a-sittin under a old buildin with a fire all to 
himself wery comfortable, and he says, 'Would you like to come 
along a me, my man?'  I says 'Yes,' and him and me and the fire 
goes home to Clerkenwell together.  That was April Fool Day.  I was 
able to count up to ten; and when April Fool Day come round again, 
I says to myself, 'Now, old chap, you're one and a eight in it.'  
April Fool Day after that, I says, 'Now, old chap, you're two and a 
eight in it.'  In course of time, I come to ten and a eight in it; 
two tens and a eight in it.  When it got so high, it got the upper 
hand of me, but this is how I always know there's a eight in it."

"Ah!" says Mr. George, resuming his breakfast.  "And where's the 
tinker?"

"Drink put him in the hospital, guv'ner, and the hospital put him--
in a glass-case, I HAVE heerd," Phil replies mysteriously.

"By that means you got promotion?  Took the business, Phil?"

"Yes, commander, I took the business.  Such as it was.  It wasn't 
much of a beat--round Saffron Hill, Hatton Garden, Clerkenwell, 
Smiffeld, and there--poor neighbourhood, where they uses up the 
kettles till they're past mending.  Most of the tramping tinkers 
used to come and lodge at our place; that was the best part of my 
master's earnings.  But they didn't come to me.  I warn't like him.  
He could sing 'em a good song.  I couldn't!  He could play 'em a 
tune on any sort of pot you please, so as it was iron or block tin.  
I never could do nothing with a pot but mend it or bile it--never 
had a note of music in me.  Besides, I was too ill-looking, and 
their wives complained of me."

"They were mighty particular.  You would pass muster in a crowd, 
Phil!" says the trooper with a pleasant smile.

"No, guv'ner," returns Phil, shaking his head.  "No, I shouldn't.  
I was passable enough when I went with the tinker, though nothing 
to boast of then; but what with blowing the fire with my mouth when 
I was young, and spileing my complexion, and singeing my hair off, 
and swallering the smoke, and what with being nat'rally unfort'nate 
in the way of running against hot metal and marking myself by sich 
means, and what with having turn-ups with the tinker as I got 
older, almost whenever he was too far gone in drink--which was 
almost always--my beauty was queer, wery queer, even at that time.  
As to since, what with a dozen years in a dark forge where the men 
was given to larking, and what with being scorched in a accident at 
a gas-works, and what with being blowed out of winder case-filling 
at the firework business, I am ugly enough to be made a show on!"

Resigning himself to which condition with a perfectly satisfied 
manner, Phil begs the favour of another cup of coffee.  While 
drinking it, he says, "It was after the case-filling blow-up when I 
first see you, commander.  You remember?"

"I remember, Phil.  You were walking along in the sun."

"Crawling, guv'ner, again a wall--"

"True, Phil--shouldering your way on--"

"In a night-cap!" exclaims Phil, excited.

"In a night-cap--"

"And hobbling with a couple of sticks!" cries Phil, still more 
excited.

"With a couple of sticks.  When--"

"When you stops, you know," cries Phil, putting down his cup and 
saucer and hastily removing his plate from his knees, "and says to 
me, 'What, comrade!  You have been in the wars!'  I didn't say much 
to you, commander, then, for I was took by surprise that a person 
so strong and healthy and bold as you was should stop to speak to 
such a limping bag of bones as I was.  But you says to me, says 
you, delivering it out of your chest as hearty as possible, so that 
it was like a glass of something hot, 'What accident have you met 
with?  You have been badly hurt.  What's amiss, old boy?  Cheer up, 
and tell us about it!'  Cheer up!  I was cheered already!  I says 
as much to you, you says more to me, I says more to you, you says 
more to me, and here I am, commander!  Here I am, commander!" cries 
Phil, who has started from his chair and unaccountably begun to 
sidle away.  "If a mark's wanted, or if it will improve the 
business, let the customers take aim at me.  They can't spoil MY 
beauty.  I'M all right.  Come on!  If they want a man to box at, 
let 'em box at me.  Let 'em knock me well about the head.  I don't 
mind.  If they want a light-weight to be throwed for practice, 
Cornwall, Devonshire, or Lancashire, let 'em throw me.  They won't 
hurt ME.  I have been throwed, all sorts of styles, all my life!"

With this unexpected speech, energetically delivered and 
accompanied by action illustrative of the various exercises 
referred to, Phil Squod shoulders his way round three sides of the 
gallery, and abruptly tacking off at his commander, makes a butt at 
him with his head, intended to express devotion to his service.  He 
then begins to clear away the breakfast.

Mr. George, after laughing cheerfully and clapping him on the 
shoulder, assists in these arrangements and helps to get the 
gallery into business order.  That done, he takes a turn at the 
dumb-bells, and afterwards weighing himself and opining that he is 
getting "too fleshy," engages with great gravity in solitary 
broadsword practice.  Meanwhile Phil has fallen to work at his 
usual table, where he screws and unscrews, and cleans, and files, 
and whistles into small apertures, and blackens himself more and 
more, and seems to do and undo everything that can be done and 
undone about a gun.

Master and man are at length disturbed by footsteps in the passage, 
where they make an unusual sound, denoting the arrival of unusual 
company.  These steps, advancing nearer and nearer to the gallery, 
bring into it a group at first sight scarcely reconcilable with any 
day in the year but the fifth of November.

It consists of a limp and ugly figure carried in a chair by two 
bearers and attended by a lean female with a face like a pinched 
mask, who might be expected immediately to recite the popular 
verses commemorative of the time when they did contrive to blow Old 
England up alive but for her keeping her lips tightly and defiantly 
closed as the chair is put down.  At which point the figure in it 
gasping, "O Lord!  Oh, dear me!  I am shaken!" adds, "How de do, my 
dear friend, how de do?"  Mr. George then descries, in the 
procession, the venerable Mr. Smallweed out for an airing, attended 
by his granddaughter Judy as body-guard.

"Mr. George, my dear friend," says Grandfather Smallweed, removing 
his right arm from the neck of one of his bearers, whom he has 
nearly throttled coming along, "how de do?  You're surprised to see 
me, my dear friend."

"I should hardly have been more surprised to have seen your friend 
in the city," returns Mr. George.

"I am very seldom out," pants Mr. Smallweed.  "I haven't been out 
for many months.  It's inconvenient--and it comes expensive.  But I 
longed so much to see you, my dear Mr. George.  How de do, sir?"

"I am well enough," says Mr. George.  "I hope you are the same."

"You can't be too well, my dear friend."  Mr. Smallweed takes him 
by both hands.  "I have brought my granddaughter Judy.  I couldn't 
keep her away.  She longed so much to see you."

"Hum!  She hears it calmly!" mutters Mr. George.

"So we got a hackney-cab, and put a chair in it, and just round the 
corner they lifted me out of the cab and into the chair, and 
carried me here that I might see my dear friend in his own 
establishment!  This," says Grandfather Smallweed, alluding to the 
bearer, who has been in danger of strangulation and who withdraws 
adjusting his windpipe, "is the driver of the cab.  He has nothing 
extra.  It is by agreement included in his fare.  This person," the 
other bearer, "we engaged in the street outside for a pint of beer.  
Which is twopence.  Judy, give the person twopence.  I was not sure 
you had a workman of your own here, my dear friend, or we needn't 
have employed this person."

Grandfather Smallweed refers to Phil with a glance of considerable 
terror and a half-subdued "O Lord!  Oh, dear me!"  Nor in his 
apprehension, on the surface of things, without some reason, for 
Phil, who has never beheld the apparition in the black-velvet cap 
before, has stopped short with a gun in his hand with much of the 
air of a dead shot intent on picking Mr. Smallweed off as an ugly 
old bird of the crow species.

"Judy, my child," says Grandfather Smallweed, "give the person his 
twopence.  It's a great deal for what he has done."

The person, who is one of those extraordinary specimens of human 
fungus that spring up spontaneously in the western streets of 
London, ready dressed in an old red jacket, with a "mission" for 
holding horses and calling coaches, received his twopence with 
anything but transport, tosses the money into the air, catches it 
over-handed, and retires.

"My dear Mr. George," says Grandfather Smallweed, "would you be so 
kind as help to carry me to the fire?  I am accustomed to a fire, 
and I am an old man, and I soon chill.  Oh, dear me!"

His closing exclamation is jerked out of the venerable gentleman by 
the suddenness with which Mr. Squod, like a genie, catches him up, 
chair and all, and deposits him on the hearth-stone.

"O Lord!" says Mr. Smallweed, panting.  "Oh, dear me!  Oh, my 
stars!  My dear friend, your workman is very strong--and very 
prompt.  O Lord, he is very prompt!  Judy, draw me back a little.  
I'm being scorched in the legs," which indeed is testified to the 
noses of all present by the smell of his worsted stockings.

The gentle Judy, having backed her grandfather a little way from 
the fire, and having shaken him up as usual, and having released 
his overshadowed eye from its black-velvet extinguisher, Mr. 
Smallweed again says, "Oh, dear me!  O Lord!" and looking about and 
meeting Mr. George's glance, again stretches out both hands.

"My dear friend!  So happy in this meeting!  And this is your 
establishment?  It's a delightful place.  It's a picture!  You 
never find that anything goes off here accidentally, do you, my 
dear friend?" adds Grandfather Smallweed, very ill at ease.

"No, no.  No fear of that."

"And your workman.  He--Oh, dear me!--he never lets anything off 
without meaning it, does he, my dear friend?"

"He has never hurt anybody but himself," says Mr. George, smiling.

"But he might, you know.  He seems to have hurt himself a good 
deal, and he might hurt somebody else," the old gentleman returns.  
"He mightn't mean it--or he even might.  Mr. George, will you order 
him to leave his infernal firearms alone and go away?"

Obedient to a nod from the trooper, Phil retires, empty-handed, to 
the other end of the gallery.  Mr. Smallweed, reassured, falls to 
rubbing his legs.

"And you're doing well, Mr. George?" he says to the trooper, 
squarely standing faced about towards him with his broadsword in 
his hand.  "You are prospering, please the Powers?"

Mr. George answers with a cool nod, adding, "Go on.  You have not 
come to say that, I know."

"You are so sprightly, Mr. George," returns the venerable 
grandfather.  "You are such good company."

"Ha ha!  Go on!" says Mr. George.

"My dear friend!  But that sword looks awful gleaming and sharp.  
It might cut somebody, by accident.  It makes me shiver, Mr. 
George.  Curse him!" says the excellent old gentleman apart to Judy 
as the trooper takes a step or two away to lay it aside.  "He owes 
me money, and might think of paying off old scores in this 
murdering place.  I wish your brimstone grandmother was here, and 
he'd shave her head off."

Mr. George, returning, folds his arms, and looking down at the old 
man, sliding every moment lower and lower in his chair, says 
quietly, "Now for it!"

"Ho!" cries Mr. Smallweed, rubbing his hands with an artful 
chuckle.  "Yes.  Now for it.  Now for what, my dear friend?"

"For a pipe," says Mr. George, who with great composure sets his 
chair in the chimney-corner, takes his pipe from the grate, fills 
it and lights it, and falls to smoking peacefully.

This tends to the discomfiture of Mr. Smallweed, who finds it so 
difficult to resume his object, whatever it may be, that he becomes 
exasperated and secretly claws the air with an impotent 
vindictiveness expressive of an intense desire to tear and rend the 
visage of Mr. George.  As the excellent old gentleman's nails are 
long and leaden, and his hands lean and veinous, and his eyes green 
and watery; and, over and above this, as he continues, while he 
claws, to slide down in his chair and to collapse into a shapeless 
bundle, he becomes such a ghastly spectacle, even in the accustomed 
eyes of Judy, that that young virgin pounces at him with something 
more than the ardour of affection and so shakes him up and pats and 
pokes him in divers parts of his body, but particularly in that 
part which the science of self-defence would call his wind, that in 
his grievous distress he utters enforced sounds like a paviour's 
rammer.

When Judy has by these means set him up again in his chair, with a 
white face and a frosty nose (but still clawing), she stretches out 
her weazen forefinger and gives Mr. George one poke in the back.  
The trooper raising his head, she makes another poke at her 
esteemed grandfather, and having thus brought them together, stares 
rigidly at the fire.

"Aye, aye!  Ho, ho!  U--u--u--ugh!" chatters Grandfather Smallweed, 
swallowing his rage.  "My dear friend!"  (still clawing).

"I tell you what," says Mr. George.  "If you want to converse with 
me, you must speak out.  I am one of the roughs, and I can't go 
about and about.  I haven't the art to do it.  I am not clever 
enough.  It don't suit me.  When you go winding round and round 
me," says the trooper, putting his pipe between his lips again, 
"damme, if I don't feel as if I was being smothered!"

And he inflates his broad chest to its utmost extent as if to 
assure himself that he is not smothered yet.

"If you have come to give me a friendly call," continues Mr. 
George, "I am obliged to you; how are you?  If you have come to see 
whether there's any property on the premises, look about you; you 
are welcome.  If you want to out with something, out with it!"

The blooming Judy, without removing her gaze from the fire, gives 
her grandfather one ghostly poke.

"You see!  It's her opinion too.  And why the devil that young 
woman won't sit down like a Christian," says Mr. George with his 
eyes musingly fixed on Judy, "I can't comprehend."

"She keeps at my side to attend to me, sir," says Grandfather 
Smallweed.  "I am an old man, my dear Mr. George, and I need some 
attention.  I can carry my years; I am not a brimstone poll-parrot" 
(snarling and looking unconsciously for the cushion), "but I need 
attention, my dear friend."

"Well!" returns the trooper, wheeling his chair to face the old 
man.  "Now then?"

"My friend in the city, Mr. George, has done a little business with 
a pupil of yours."

"Has he?" says Mr. George.  "I am sorry to hear it."

"Yes, sir." Grandfather Smallweed rubs his legs.  "He is a fine 
young soldier now, Mr. George, by the name of Carstone.  Friends 
came forward and paid it all up, honourable."

"Did they?" returns Mr. George.  "Do you think your friend in the 
city would like a piece of advice?"

"I think he would, my dear friend.  From you."

"I advise him, then, to do no more business in that quarter.  
There's no more to be got by it.  The young gentleman, to my 
knowledge, is brought to a dead halt."

"No, no, my dear friend.  No, no, Mr. George.  No, no, no, sir," 
remonstrates Grandfather Smallweed, cunningly rubbing his spare 
legs.  "Not quite a dead halt, I think.  He has good friends, and 
he is good for his pay, and he is good for the selling price of his 
commission, and he is good for his chance in a lawsuit, and he is 
good for his chance in a wife, and--oh, do you know, Mr. George, I 
think my friend would consider the young gentleman good for 
something yet?" says Grandfather Smallweed, turning up his velvet 
cap and scratching his ear like a monkey.

Mr. George, who has put aside his pipe and sits with an arm on his 
chair-back, beats a tattoo on the ground with his right foot as if 
he were not particularly pleased with the turn the conversation has 
taken.

"But to pass from one subject to another," resumes Mr. Smallweed.  
"'To promote the conversation, as a joker might say.  To pass, Mr. 
George, from the ensign to the captain."

"What are you up to, now?" asks Mr. George, pausing with a frown in 
stroking the recollection of his moustache.  "What captain?"

"Our captain.  The captain we know of.  Captain Hawdon."

"Oh! That's it, is it?" says Mr. George with a low whistle as he 
sees both grandfather and granddaughter looking hard at him.  "You 
are there!  Well?  What about it?  Come, I won't be smothered any 
more.  Speak!"

"My dear friend," returns the old man, "I was applied--Judy, shake 
me up a little!--I was applied to yesterday about the captain, and 
my opinion still is that the captain is not dead."

"Bosh!" observes Mr. George.

"What was your remark, my dear friend?" inquires the old man with 
his hand to his ear.

"Bosh!"

"Ho!" says Grandfather Smallweed.  "Mr. George, of my opinion you 
can judge for yourself according to the questions asked of me and 
the reasons given for asking 'em.  Now, what do you think the 
lawyer making the inquiries wants?"

"A job," says Mr. George.

"Nothing of the kind!"

"Can't be a lawyer, then," says Mr. George, folding his arms with 
an air of confirmed resolution.

"My dear friend, he is a lawyer, and a famous one.  He wants to see 
some fragment in Captain Hawdon's writing.  He don't want to keep 
it.  He only wants to see it and compare it with a writing in his 
possession."

"Well?"

"Well, Mr. George.  Happening to remember the advertisement 
concerning Captain Hawdon and any information that could be given 
respecting him, he looked it up and came to me--just as you did, my 
dear friend.  WILL you shake hands?  So glad you came that day!  I 
should have missed forming such a friendship if you hadn't come!"

"Well, Mr. Smallweed?" says Mr. George again after going through 
the ceremony with some stiffness.

"I had no such thing.  I have nothing but his signature.  Plague 
pestilence and famine, battle murder and sudden death upon him," 
says the old man, making a curse out of one of his few remembrances 
of a prayer and squeezing up his velvet cap between his angry 
hands, "I have half a million of his signatures, I think!  But 
you," breathlessly recovering his mildness of speech as Judy re-
adjusts the cap on his skittle-ball of a head, "you, my dear Mr. 
George, are likely to have some letter or paper that would suit the 
purpose.  Anything would suit the purpose, written in the hand."

"Some writing in that hand," says the trooper, pondering; "may be, 
I have."

"My dearest friend!"

"May be, I have not."

"Ho!" says Grandfather Smallweed, crest-fallen.

"But if I had bushels of it, I would not show as much as would make 
a cartridge without knowing why."

"Sir, I have told you why.  My dear Mr. George, I have told you 
why."

"Not enough," says the trooper, shaking his head.  "I must know 
more, and approve it."

"Then, will you come to the lawyer?  My dear friend, will you come 
and see the gentleman?" urges Grandfather Smallweed, pulling out a 
lean old silver watch with hands like the leg of a skeleton.  "I 
told him it was probable I might call upon him between ten and 
eleven this forenoon, and it's now half after ten.  Will you come 
and see the gentleman, Mr. George?"

"Hum!" says he gravely.  "I don't mind that.  Though why this 
should concern you so much, I don't know."

"Everything concerns me that has a chance in it of bringing 
anything to light about him.  Didn't he take us all in?  Didn't he 
owe us immense sums, all round?  Concern me?  Who can anything 
about him concern more than me?  Not, my dear friend," says 
Grandfather Smallweed, lowering his tone, "that I want YOU to 
betray anything.  Far from it.  Are you ready to come, my dear 
friend?"

"Aye! I'll come in a moment.  I promise nothing, you know."

"No, my dear Mr. George; no."

"And you mean to say you're going to give me a lift to this place, 
wherever it is, without charging for it?" Mr. George inquires, 
getting his hat and thick wash-leather gloves.

This pleasantry so tickles Mr. Smallweed that he laughs, long and 
low, before the fire.  But ever while he laughs, he glances over 
his paralytic shoulder at Mr. George and eagerly watches him as he 
unlocks the padlock of a homely cupboard at the distant end of the 
gallery, looks here and there upon the higher shelves, and 
ultimately takes something out with a rustling of paper, folds it, 
and puts it in his breast.  Then Judy pokes Mr. Smallweed once, and 
Mr. Smallweed pokes Judy once.

"I am ready," says the trooper, coming back.  "Phil, you can carry 
this old gentleman to his coach, and make nothing of him."

"Oh, dear me!  O Lord!  Stop a moment!" says Mr. Smallweed.  "He's 
so very prompt!  Are you sure you can do it carefully, my worthy 
man?"

Phil makes no reply, but seizing the chair and its load, sidles 
away, tightly bugged by the now speechless Mr. Smallweed, and bolts 
along the passage as if he had an acceptable commission to carry 
the old gentleman to the nearest volcano.  His shorter trust, 
however, terminating at the cab, he deposits him there; and the 
fair Judy takes her place beside him, and the chair embellishes the 
roof, and Mr. George takes the vacant place upon the box.

Mr. George is quite confounded by the spectacle he beholds from 
time to time as he peeps into the cab through the window behind 
him, where the grim Judy is always motionless, and the old 
gentleman with his cap over one eye is always sliding off the seat 
into the straw and looking upward at him out of his other eye with 
a helpless expression of being jolted in the back.



CHAPTER XXVII

More Old Soldiers Than One


Mr. George has not far to ride with folded arms upon the box, for 
their destination is Lincoln's Inn Fields.  When the driver stops 
his horses, Mr. George alights, and looking in at the window, says, 
"What, Mr. Tulkinghorn's your man, is he?"

"Yes, my dear friend.  Do you know him, Mr. George?"

"Why, I have heard of him--seen him too, I think.  But I don't know 
him, and he don't know me."

There ensues the carrying of Mr. Smallweed upstairs, which is done 
to perfection with the trooper's help.  He is borne into Mr. 
Tulkinghorn's great room and deposited on the Turkey rug before the 
fire.  Mr. Tulkinghorn is not within at the present moment but will 
be back directly.  The occupant of the pew in the hall, having said 
thus much, stirs the fire and leaves the triumvirate to warm 
themselves.

Mr. George is mightily curious in respect of the room.  He looks up 
at the painted ceiling, looks round at the old law-books, 
contemplates the portraits of the great clients, reads aloud the 
names on the boxes.

"'Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet,'" Mr. George reads thoughtfully.  
"Ha!  'Manor of Chesney Wold.'  Humph!"  Mr. George stands looking 
at these boxes a long while--as if they were pictures--and comes 
back to the fire repeating, "Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet, and 
Manor of Chesney Wold, hey?"

"Worth a mint of money, Mr. George!" whispers Grandfather 
Smallweed, rubbing his legs.  "Powerfully rich!"

"Who do you mean?  This old gentleman, or the Baronet?"

"This gentleman, this gentleman."

"So I have heard; and knows a thing or two, I'll hold a wager.  Not 
bad quarters, either," says Mr. George, looking round again.  "See 
the strong-box yonder!"

This reply is cut short by Mr. Tulkinghorn's arrival.  There is no 
change in him, of course.  Rustily drest, with his spectacles in 
his hand, and their very case worn threadbare.  In manner, close 
and dry.  In voice, husky and low.  In face, watchful behind a 
blind; habitually not uncensorious and contemptuous perhaps.  The 
peerage may have warmer worshippers and faithfuller believers than 
Mr. Tulkinghorn, after all, if everything were known.

"Good morning, Mr. Smallweed, good morning!" he says as he comes 
in.  "You have brought the sergeant, I see.  Sit down, sergeant."

As Mr. Tulkinghorn takes off his gloves and puts them in his hat, 
he looks with half-closed eyes across the room to where the trooper 
stands and says within himself perchance, "You'll do, my friend!"

"Sit down, sergeant," he repeats as he comes to his table, which is 
set on one side of the fire, and takes his easy-chair.  "Cold and 
raw this morning, cold and raw!"  Mr. Tulkinghorn warms before the 
bars, alternately, the palms and knuckles of his hands and looks 
(from behind that blind which is always down) at the trio sitting 
in a little semicircle before him.

"Now, I can feel what I am about" (as perhaps he can in two 
senses), "Mr. Smallweed."  The old gentleman is newly shaken up by 
Judy to bear his part in the conversation.  "You have brought our 
good friend the sergeant, I see."

"Yes, sir," returns Mr. Smallweed, very servile to the lawyer's 
wealth and influence.

"And what does the sergeant say about this business?"

"Mr. George," says Grandfather Smallweed with a tremulous wave of 
his shrivelled hand, "this is the gentleman, sir."

Mr. George salutes the gentleman but otherwise sits bolt upright 
and profoundly silent--very forward in his chair, as if the full 
complement of regulation appendages for a field-day hung about him.

Mr. Tulkinghorn proceeds, "Well, George--I believe your name is 
George?"

"It is so, Sir."

"What do you say, George?"

"I ask your pardon, sir," returns the trooper, "but I should wish 
to know what YOU say?"

"Do you mean in point of reward?"

"I mean in point of everything, sir."

This is so very trying to Mr. Smallweed's temper that he suddenly 
breaks out with "You're a brimstone beast!" and as suddenly asks 
pardon of Mr. Tulkinghorn, excusing himself for this slip of the 
tongue by saying to Judy, "I was thinking of your grandmother, my 
dear."

"I supposed, sergeant," Mr. Tulkinghorn resumes as he leans on one 
side of his chair and crosses his legs, "that Mr. Smallweed might 
have sufficiently explained the matter.  It lies in the smallest 
compass, however.  You served under Captain Hawdon at one time, and 
were his attendant in illness, and rendered him many little 
services, and were rather in his confidence, I am told.  That is 
so, is it not?"

"Yes, sir, that is so," says Mr. George with military brevity.

"Therefore you may happen to have in your possession something--
anything, no matter what; accounts, instructions, orders, a letter, 
anything--in Captain Hawdon's writing.  I wish to compare his 
writing with some that I have.  If you can give me the opportunity, 
you shall be rewarded for your trouble.  Three, four, five, 
guineas, you would consider handsome, I dare say."

"Noble, my dear friend!" cries Grandfather Smallweed, screwing up 
his eyes.

"If not, say how much more, in your conscience as a soldier, you 
can demand.  There is no need for you to part with the writing, 
against your inclination--though I should prefer to have it."

Mr. George sits squared in exactly the same attitude, looks at the 
painted ceiling, and says never a word.  The irascible Mr. 
Smallweed scratches the air.

"The question is," says Mr. Tulkinghorn in his methodical, subdued, 
uninterested way, "first, whether you have any of Captain Hawdon's 
writing?"

"First, whether I have any of Captain Hawdon's writing, sir," 
repeats Mr. George.

"Secondly, what will satisfy you for the trouble of producing it?"

"Secondly, what will satisfy me for the trouble of producing it, 
sir," repeats Mr. George.

"Thirdly, you can judge for yourself whether it is at all like 
that," says Mr. Tulkinghorn, suddenly handing him some sheets of 
written paper tied together.

"Whether it is at all like that, sir.  Just so," repeats Mr. 
George.

All three repetitions Mr. George pronounces in a mechanical manner, 
looking straight at Mr. Tulkinghorn; nor does he so much as glance 
at the affidavit in Jarndyce and Jarndyce, that has been given to 
him for his inspection (though he still holds it in his hand), but 
continues to look at the lawyer with an air of troubled meditation.

"Well?" says Mr. Tulkinghorn.  "What do you say?"

"Well, sir," replies Mr. George, rising erect and looking immense, 
"I would rather, if you'll excuse me, have nothing to do with 
this."

Mr. Tulkinghorn, outwardly quite undisturbed, demands, "Why not?"

"Why, sir," returns the trooper.  "Except on military compulsion, I 
am not a man of business.  Among civilians I am what they call in 
Scotland a ne'er-do-weel.  I have no head for papers, sir.  I can 
stand any fire better than a fire of cross questions.  I mentioned 
to Mr. Smallweed, only an hour or so ago, that when I come into 
things of this kind I feel as if I was being smothered.  And that 
is my sensation," says Mr. George, looking round upon the company, 
"at the present moment."

With that, he takes three strides forward to replace the papers on 
the lawyer's table and three strides backward to resume his former 
station, where he stands perfectly upright, now looking at the 
ground and now at the painted ceillhg, with his hands behind him as 
if to prevent himself from accepting any other document whatever.

Under this provocation, Mr. Smallweed's favourite adjective of 
disparagement is so close to his tongue that he begins the words 
"my dear friend" with the monosyllable "brim," thus converting the 
possessive pronoun into brimmy and appearing to have an impediment 
in his speech.  Once past this difficulty, however, he exhorts his 
dear friend in the tenderest manner not to be rash, but to do what 
so eminent a gentleman requires, and to do it with a good grace, 
confident that it must be unobjectionable as well as profitable.  
Mr. Tulkinghorn merely utters an occasional sentence, as, "You are 
the best judge of your own interest, sergeant."  "Take care you do 
no harm by this."  "Please yourself, please yourself."  "If you 
know what you mean, that's quite enough."  These he utters with an 
appearance of perfect indifference as he looks over the papers on 
his table and prepares to write a letter.

Mr. George looks distrustfully from the painted ceiling to the 
ground, from the ground to Mr. Smallweed, from Mr. Smallweed to Mr. 
Tulkinghorn, and from Mr. Tulkinghorn to the painted ceiling again, 
often in his perplexity changing the leg on which he rests.

"I do assure you, sir," says Mr. George, "not to say it 
offensively, that between you and Mr. Smallweed here, I really am 
being smothered fifty times over.  I really am, sir.  I am not a 
match for you gentlemen.  Will you allow me to ask why you want to 
see the captain's hand, in the case that I could find any specimen 
of it?"

Mr. Tulkinghorn quietly shakes his head.  "No.  If you were a man 
of business, sergeant, you would not need to be informed that there 
are confidential reasons, very harmless in themselves, for many 
such wants in the profession to which I belong.  But if you are 
afraid of doing any injury to Captain Hawdon, you may set your mind 
at rest about that."

"Aye!  He is dead, sir."

"IS he?"  Mr. Tulkinghorn quietly sits down to write.

"Well, sir," says the trooper, looking into his hat after another 
disconcerted pause, "I am sorry not to have given you more 
satisfaction.  If it would be any satisfaction to any one that I 
should be confirmed in my judgment that I would rather have nothing 
to do with this by a friend of mine who has a better head for 
business than I have, and who is an old soldier, I am willing to 
consult with him.  I--I really am so completely smothered myself at 
present," says Mr. George, passing his hand hopelessly across his 
brow, "that I don't know but what it might be a satisfaction to 
me."

Mr. Smallweed, hearing that this authority is an old soldier, so 
strongly inculcates the expediency of the trooper's taking counsel 
with him, and particularly informing him of its being a question of 
five guineas or more, that Mr. George engages to go and see him.  
Mr. Tulkinghorn says nothing either way.

"I'll consult my friend, then, by your leave, sir," says the 
trooper, "and I'll take the liberty of looking in again with the 
final answer in the course of the day.  Mr. Smallweed, if you wish 
to be carried downstairs--"

"In a moment, my dear friend, in a moment.  Will you first let me 
speak half a word with this gentleman in private?"

"Certainly, sir.  Don't hurry yourself on my account."  The trooper 
retires to a distant part of the room and resumes his curious 
inspection of the boxes, strong and otherwise.

"If I wasn't as weak as a brimstone baby, sir," whispers 
Grandfather Smallweed, drawing the lawyer down to his level by the 
lapel of his coat and flashing some half-quenched green fire out of 
his angry eyes, "I'd tear the writing away from him.  He's got it 
buttoned in his breast.  I saw him put it there.  Judy saw him put 
it there.  Speak up, you crabbed image for the sign of a walking-
stick shop, and say you saw him put it there!"

This vehement conjuration the old gentleman accompanies with such a 
thrust at his granddaughter that it is too much for his strength, 
and he slips away out of his chair, drawing Mr. Tulkinghorn with 
him, until he is arrested by Judy, and well shaken.

"Violence will not do for me, my friend," Mr. Tulkinghorn then 
remarks coolly.

"No, no, I know, I know, sir.  But it's chafing and galling--it's--
it's worse than your smattering chattering magpie of a grandmother," 
to the imperturbable Judy, who only looks at the fire, "to know he 
has got what's wanted and won't give it up.  He, not to give it up!  
HE!  A vagabond!  But never mind, sir, never mind.  At the most, he 
has only his own way for a little while.  I have him periodically 
in a vice.  I'll twist him, sir.  I'll screw him, sir.  If he won't 
do it with a good grace, I'll make him do it with a bad one, sir!  
Now, my dear Mr. George," says Grandfather Smallweed, winking at 
the lawyer hideously as he releases him, "I am ready for your kind 
assistance, my excellent friend!"

Mr. Tulkinghorn, with some shadowy sign of amusement manifesting 
itself through his self-possession, stands on the hearth-rug with 
his back to the fire, watching the disappearance of Mr. Smallweed 
and acknowledging the trooper's parting salute with one slight nod.

It is more difficult to get rid of the old gentleman, Mr. George 
finds, than to bear a hand in carrying him downstairs, for when he 
is replaced in his conveyance, he is so loquacious on the subject 
of the guineas and retains such an affectionate hold of his button
--having, in truth, a secret longing to rip his coat open and rob 
him--that some degree of force is necessary on the trooper's part 
to effect a separation.  It is accomplished at last, and he 
proceeds alone in quest of his adviser.

By the cloisterly Temple, and by Whitefriars (there, not without a 
glance at Hanging-Sword Alley, which would seem to be something in 
his way), and by Blackfriars Bridge, and Blackfriars Road, Mr. 
George sedately marches to a street of little shops lying somewhere 
in that ganglion of roads from Kent and Surrey, and of streets from 
the bridges of London, centring in the far-famed elephant who has 
lost his castle formed of a thousand four-horse coaches to a 
stronger iron monster than he, ready to chop him into mince-meat 
any day he dares.  To one of the little shops in this street, which 
is a musician's shop, having a few fiddles in the window, and some 
Pan's pipes and a tambourine, and a triangle, and certain elongated 
scraps of music, Mr. George directs his massive tread.  And halting 
at a few paces from it, as he sees a soldierly looking woman, with 
her outer skirts tucked up, come forth with a small wooden tub, and 
in that tub commence a-whisking and a-splashing on the margin of 
the pavement, Mr. George says to himself, "She's as usual, washing 
greens.  I never saw her, except upon a baggage-waggon, when she 
wasn't washing greens!"

The subject of this reflection is at all events so occupied in 
washing greens at present that she remains unsuspicious of Mr. 
George's approach until, lifting up herself and her tub together 
when she has poured the water off into the gutter, she finds him 
standing near her.  Her reception of him is not flattering.

"George, I never see you but I wish you was a hundred mile away!"

The trooper, without remarking on this welcome, follows into the 
musical-instrument shop, where the lady places her tub of greens 
upon the counter, and having shaken hands with him, rests her arms 
upon it.

"I never," she says, "George, consider Matthew Bagnet safe a minute 
when you're near him.  You are that resfless and that roving--"

"Yes!  I know I am, Mrs. Bagnet.  I know I am."

"You know you are!" says Mrs. Bagnet.  "What's the use of that?  
WHY are you?"

"The nature of the animal, I suppose," returns the trooper good-
humouredly.

"Ah!" cries Mrs. Bagnet, something shrilly.  "But what satisfaction 
will the nature of the animal be to me when the animal shall have 
tempted my Mat away from the musical business to New Zealand or 
Australey?"

Mrs. Bagnet is not at all an ill-looking woman.  Rather large-
boned, a little coarse in the grain, and freckled by the sun and 
wind which have tanned her hair upon the forehead, but healthy, 
wholesome, and bright-eyed.  A strong, busy, active, honest-faced 
woman of from forty-five to fifty.  Clean, hardy, and so 
economically dressed (though substantially) that the only article 
of ornament of which she stands possessed appear's to be her 
wedding-ring, around which her finger has grown to be so large 
since it was put on that it will never come off again until it 
shall mingle with Mrs. Bagnet's dust.

"Mrs. Bagnet," says the trooper, "I am on my parole with you.  Mat 
will get no harm from me.  You may trust me so far."

"Well, I think I may.  But the very looks of you are unsettling," 
Mrs. Bagnet rejoins.  "Ah, George, George!  If you had only settled 
down and married Joe Pouch's widow when he died in North America, 
SHE'D have combed your hair for you."

"It was a chance for me, certainly," returns the trooper half 
laughingly, half seriously, "but I shall never settle down into a 
respectable man now.  Joe Pouch's widow might have done me good--
there was something in her, and something of her--but I couldn't 
make up my mind to it.  If I had had the luck to meet with such a 
wife as Mat found!"

Mrs. Bagnet, who seems in a virtuous way to be under little reserve 
with a good sort of fellow, but to be another good sort of fellow 
herself for that matter, receives this compliment by flicking Mr. 
George in the face with a head of greens and taking her tub into 
the little room behind the shop.

"Why, Quebec, my poppet," says George, following, on invitation, 
into that department.  "And little Malta, too!  Come and kiss your 
Bluffy!"

These young ladies--not supposed to have been actually christened 
by the names applied to them, though always so called in the family 
from the places of their birth in barracks--are respectively 
employed on three-legged stools, the younger (some five or six 
years old) in learning her letters out of a penny primer, the elder 
(eight or nine perhaps) in teaching her and sewing with great 
assiduity.  Both hail Mr. George with acclamations as an old friend 
and after some kissing and romping plant their stools beside him.

"And how's young Woolwich?" says Mr. George.

"Ah!  There now!" cries Mrs. Bagnet, turning about from her 
saucepans (for she is cooking dinner) with a bright flush on her 
face.  "Would you believe it?  Got an engagement at the theayter, 
with his father, to play the fife in a military piece."

"Well done, my godson!" cries Mr. George, slapping his thigh.

"I believe you!" says Mrs. Bagnet.  "He's a Briton.  That's what 
Woolwich is.  A Briton!"

"And Mat blows away at his bassoon, and you're respectable 
civilians one and all," says Mr. George.  "Family people.  Children 
growing up.  Mat's old mother in Scotland, and your old father 
somewhere else, corresponded with, and helped a little, and--well, 
well!  To be sure, I don't know why I shouldn't be wished a hundred 
mile away, for I have not much to do with all this!"

Mr. George is becoming thoughtful, sitting before the fire in the 
whitewashed room, which has a sanded floor and a barrack smell and 
contains nothing superfluous and has not a visible speck of dirt or 
dust in it, from the faces of Quebec and Malta to the bright tin 
pots and pannikins upon the dresser shelves--Mr. George is becoming 
thoughtful, sitting here while Mrs. Bagnet is busy, when Mr. Bagnet 
and young Woolwich opportunely come home.  Mr. Bagnet is an ex-
artilleryman, tall and upright, with shaggy eyebrows and whiskers 
like the fibres of a coco-nut, not a hair upon his head, and a 
torrid complexion.  His voice, short, deep, and resonant, is not at 
all unlike the tones of the instrument to which he is devoted.  
Indeed there may be generally observed in him an unbending, 
unyielding, brass-bound air, as if he were himself the bassoon of 
the human orchestra.  Young Woolwich is the type and model of a 
young drummer.

Both father and son salute the trooper heartily.  He saying, in due 
season, that he has come to advise with Mr. Bagnet, Mr. Bagnet 
hospitably declares that he will hear of no business until after 
dinner and that his friend shall not partake of his counsel without 
first partaking of boiled pork and greens.  The trooper yielding to 
this invitation, he and Mr. Bagnet, not to embarrass the domestic 
preparations, go forth to take a turn up and down the little 
street, which they promenade with measured tread and folded arms, 
as if it were a rampart.

"George," says Mr. Bagnet.  "You know me.  It's my old girl that 
advises.  She has the head.  But I never own to it before her.  
Discipline must be maintained.  Wait till the greens is off her 
mind.  Then we'll consult.  Whatever the old girl says, do--do it!"

"I intend to, Mat," replies the other.  "I would sooner take her 
opinion than that of a college."

"College," returns Mr. Bagnet in short sentences, bassoon-like.  
"What college could you leave--in another quarter of the world--
with nothing but a grey cloak and an umbrella--to make its way home 
to Europe?  The old girl would do it to-morrow.  Did it once!"

"You are right," says Mr. George.

"What college," pursues Bagnet, "could you set up in life--with two 
penn'orth of white lime--a penn'orth of fuller's earth--a ha'porth 
of sand--and the rest of the change out of sixpence in money?  
That's what the old girl started on.  In the present business."

"I am rejoiced to hear it's thriving, Mat."

"The old girl," says Mr. Bagnet, acquiescing, "saves.  Has a 
stocking somewhere.  With money in it.  I never saw it.  But I know 
she's got it.  Wait till the greens is off her mind.  Then she'll 
set you up."

"She is a treasure!" exclaims Mr. George.

"She's more.  But I never own to it before her.  Discipline must be 
maintained.  It was the old girl that brought out my musical 
abilities.  I should have been in the artillery now but for the old 
girl.  Six years I hammered at the fiddle.  Ten at the flute.  The 
old girl said it wouldn't do; intention good, but want of 
flexibility; try the bassoon.  The old girl borrowed a bassoon from 
the bandmaster of the Rifle Regiment.  I practised in the trenches.  
Got on, got another, get a living by it!"

George remarks that she looks as fresh as a rose and as sound as an 
apple.

"The old girl," says Mr. Bagnet in reply, "is a thoroughly fine 
woman.  Consequently she is like a thoroughly fine day.  Gets finer 
as she gets on.  I never saw the old girl's equal.  But I never own 
to it before her.  Discipline must be maintained!"

Proceeding to converse on indifferent matters, they walk up and 
down the little street, keeping step and time, until summoned by 
Quebec and Malta to do justice to the pork and greens, over which 
Mrs. Bagnet, like a military chaplain, says a short grace.  In the 
distribution of these comestibles, as in every other household 
duty, Mrs. Bagnet developes an exact system, sitting with every 
dish before her, allotting to every portion of pork its own portion 
of pot-liquor, greens, potatoes, and even mustard, and serving it 
out complete.  Having likewise served out the beer from a can and 
thus supplied the mess with all things necessary, Mrs. Bagnet 
proceeds to satisfy her own hunger, which is in a healthy state.  
The kit of the mess, if the table furniture may be so denominated, 
is chiefly composed of utensils of horn and tin that have done duty 
in several parts of the world.  Young Woolwich's knife, in 
particular, which is of the oyster kind, with the additional 
feature of a strong shutting-up movement which frequently balks the 
appetite of that young musician, is mentioned as having gone in 
various hands the complete round of foreign service.

The dinner done, Mrs. Bagnet, assisted by the younger branches (who 
polish their own cups and platters, knives and forks), makes all 
the dinner garniture shine as brightly as before and puts it all 
away, first sweeping the hearth, to the end that Mr. Bagnet and the 
visitor may not be retarded in the smoking of their pipes.  These 
household cares involve much pattening and counter-pattening in the 
backyard and considerable use of a pail, which is finally so happy 
as to assist in the ablutions of Mrs. Bagnet herself.  That old 
girl reappearing by and by, quite fresh, and sitting down to her 
needlework, then and only then--the greens being only then to be 
considered as entirely off her mind--Mr. Bagnet requests the 
trooper to state his case.

This Mr. George does with great discretion, appearing to address 
himself to Mr. Bagnet, but having an eye solely on the old girl all 
the time, as Bagnet has himself.  She, equally discreet, busies 
herself with her needlework.  The case fully stated, Mr. Bagnet 
resorts to his standard artifice for the maintenance of discipline.

"That's the whole of it, is it, George?" says he.

"That's the whole of it."

"You act according to my opinion?"

"I shall be guided," replies George, "entirely by it."

"Old girl," says Mr. Bagnet, "give him my opinion.  You know it.  
Tell him what it is."

It is that he cannot have too little to do with people who are too 
deep for him and cannot be too careful of interference with matters 
he does not understand--that the plain rule is to do nothing in the 
dark, to be a party to nothing underhanded or mysterious, and never 
to put his foot where he cannot see the ground.  This, in effect, 
is Mr. Bagnet's opinion, as delivered through the old girl, and it 
so relieves Mr. George's mind by confirming his own opinion and 
banishing his doubts that he composes himself to smoke another pipe 
on that exceptional occasion and to have a talk over old times with 
the whole Bagnet family, according to their various ranges of 
experience.

Through these means it comes to pass that Mr. George does not again 
rise to his full height in that parlour until the time is drawing 
on when the bassoon and fife are expected by a British public at 
the theatre; and as it takes time even then for Mr. George, in his 
domestic character of Bluffy, to take leave of Quebec and Malta and 
insinuate a sponsorial shilling into the pocket of his godson with 
felicitations on his success in life, it is dark when Mr. George 
again turns his face towards Lincoln's Inn Fields.

"A family home," he ruminates as he marches along, "however small 
it is, makes a man like me look lonely.  But it's well I never made 
that evolution of matrimony.  I shouldn't have been fit for it.  I 
am such a vagabond still, even at my present time of life, that I 
couldn't hold to the gallery a month together if it was a regular 
pursuit or if I didn't camp there, gipsy fashion.  Come!  I 
disgrace nobody and cumber nobody; that's something.  I have not 
done that for many a long year!"

So he whistles it off and marches on.

Arrived in Lincoln's Inn Fields and mounting Mr. Tulkinghorn's 
stair, he finds the outer door closed and the chambers shut, but 
the trooper not knowing much about outer doors, and the staircase 
being dark besides, he is yet fumbling and groping about, hoping to 
discover a bell-handle or to open the door for himself, when Mr. 
Tulkinghorn comes up the stairs (quietly, of course) and angrily 
asks, "Who is that?  What are you doing there?"

"I ask your pardon, sir.  It's George.  The sergeant."

"And couldn't George, the sergeant, see that my door was locked?"

"Why, no, sir, I couldn't.  At any rate, I didn't," says the 
trooper, rather nettled.

"Have you changed your mind?  Or are you in the same mind?" Mr. 
Tulkinghorn demands.  But he knows well enough at a glance.

"In the same mind, sir."

"I thought so.  That's sufficient.  You can go.  So you are the 
man," says Mr. Tulkinghorn, opening his door with the key, "in 
whose hiding-place Mr. Gridley was found?"

"Yes, I AM the man," says the trooper, stopping two or three stairs 
down.  "What then, sir?"

"What then?  I don't like your associates.  You should not have 
seen the inside of my door this morning if I had thought of your 
being that man.  Gridley?  A threatening, murderous, dangerous 
fellow."

With these words, spoken in an unusually high tone for him, the 
lawyer goes into his rooms and shuts the door with a thundering 
noise.

Mr. George takes his dismissal in great dudgeon, the greater 
because a clerk coming up the stairs has heard the last words of 
all and evidently applies them to him.  "A pretty character to 
bear," the trooper growls with a hasty oath as he strides 
downstairs.  "A threatening, murderous, dangerous fellow!"  And 
looking up, he sees the clerk looking down at him and marking him 
as he passes a lamp.  This so intensifies his dudgeon that for five 
minutes he is in an ill humour.  But he whistles that off like the 
rest of it and marches home to the shooting gallery.



CHAPTER XXVIII

The Ironmaster


Sir Leicester Dedlock has got the better, for the time being, of 
the family gout and is once more, in a literal no less than in a 
figurative point of view, upon his legs.  He is at his place in 
Lincolnshire; but the waters are out again on the low-lying 
grounds, and the cold and damp steal into Chesney Wold, though well 
defended, and eke into Sir Leicester's bones.  The blazing fires of 
faggot and coal--Dedlock timber and antediluvian forest--that blaze 
upon the broad wide hearths and wink in the twilight on the 
frowning woods, sullen to see how trees are sacrificed, do not 
exclude the enemy.  The hot-water pipes that trail themselves all 
over the house, the cushioned doors and windows, and the screens 
and curtains fail to supply the fires' deficiencies and to satisfy 
Sir Leicester's need.  Hence the fashionable intelligence proclaims 
one morning to the listening earth that Lady Dedlock is expected 
shortly to return to town for a few weeks.

It is a melancholy truth that even great men have their poor 
relations.  Indeed great men have often more than their fair share 
of poor relations, inasmuch as very red blood of the superior 
quality, like inferior blood unlawfully shed, WILL cry aloud and 
WILL be heard.  Sir Leicester's cousins, in the remotest degree, 
are so many murders in the respect that they "will out."  Among 
whom there are cousins who are so poor that one might almost dare 
to think it would have been the happier for them never to have been 
plated links upon the Dedlock chain of gold, but to have been made 
of common iron at first and done base service.

Service, however (with a few limited reservations, genteel but not 
profitable), they may not do, being of the Dedlock dignity.  So 
they visit their richer cousins, and get into debt when they can, 
and live but shabbily when they can't, and find--the women no 
husbands, and the men no wives--and ride in borrowed carriages, and 
sit at feasts that are never of their own making, and so go through 
high life.  The rich family sum has been divided by so many 
figures, and they are the something over that nobody knows what to 
do with.

Everybody on Sir Leicester Dedlock's side of the question and of 
his way of thinking would appear to be his cousin more or less.  
From my Lord Boodle, through the Duke of Foodle, down to Noodle, 
Sir Leicester, like a glorious spider, stretches his threads of 
relationship.  But while he is stately in the cousinship of the 
Everybodys, he is a kind and generous man, according to his 
dignified way, in the cousinship of the Nobodys; and at the present 
time, in despite of the damp, he stays out the visit of several 
such cousins at Chesney Wold with the constancy of a martyr.

Of these, foremost in the front rank stands Volumnia Dedlock, a 
young lady (of sixty) who is doubly highly related, having the 
honour to be a poor relation, by the mother's side, to another 
great family.  Miss Volumnia, displaying in early life a pretty 
talent for cutting ornaments out of coloured paper, and also for 
singing to the guitar in the Spanish tongue, and propounding French 
conundrums in country houses, passed the twenty years of her 
existence between twenty and forty in a sufficiently agreeable 
manner.  Lapsing then out of date and being considered to bore 
mankind by her vocal performances in the Spanish language, she 
retired to Bath, where she lives slenderly on an annual present 
from Sir Leicester and whence she makes occasional resurrections in 
the country houses of her cousins.  She has an extensive 
acquaintance at Bath among appalling old gentlemen with thin legs 
and nankeen trousers, and is of high standing in that dreary city.  
But she is a little dreaded elsewhere in consequence of an 
indiscreet profusion in the article of rouge and persistency in an 
obsolete pearl necklace like a rosary of little bird's-eggs.

In any country in a wholesome state, Volumnia would be a clear case 
for the pension list.  Efforts have been made to get her on it, and 
when William Buffy came in, it was fully expected that her name 
would be put down for a couple of hundred a year.  But William 
Buffy somehow discovered, contrary to all expectation, that these 
were not the times when it could be done, and this was the first 
clear indication Sir Leicester Dedlock had conveyed to him that the 
country was going to pieces.

There is likewise the Honourable Bob Stables, who can make warm 
mashes with the skill of a veterinary surgeon and is a better shot 
than most gamekeepers.  He has been for some time particularly 
desirous to serve his country in a post of good emoluments, 
unaccompanied by any trouble or responsibility.  In a well-
regulated body politic this natural desire on the part of a 
spirited young gentleman so highly connected would be speedily 
recognized, but somehow William Buffy found when he came in that 
these were not times in which he could manage that little matter 
either, and this was the second indication Sir Leicester Dedlock 
had conveyed to him that the country was going to pieces.

The rest of the cousins are ladies and gentlemen of various ages 
and capacities, the major part amiable and sensible and likely to 
have done well enough in life if they could have overcome their 
cousinship; as it is, they are almost all a little worsted by it, 
and lounge in purposeless and listless paths, and seem to be quite 
as much at a loss how to dispose of themselves as anybody else can 
be how to dispose of them.

In this society, and where not, my Lady Dedlock reigns supreme.  
Beautiful, elegant, accomplished, and powerful in her little world 
(for the world of fashion does not stretch ALL the way from pole to 
pole), her influence in Sir Leicester's house, however haughty and 
indifferent her manner, is greatly to improve it and refine it.  
The cousins, even those older cousins who were paralysed when Sir 
Leicester married her, do her feudal homage; and the Honourable Bob 
Stables daily repeats to some chosen person between breakfast and 
lunch his favourite original remark, that she is the best-groomed 
woman in the whole stud.

Such the guests in the long drawing-room at Chesney Wold this 
dismal night when the step on the Ghost's Walk (inaudible here, 
however) might be the step of a deceased cousin shut out in the 
cold.  It is near bed-time.  Bedroom fires blaze brightly all over 
the house, raising ghosts of grim furniture on wall and ceiling.  
Bedroom candlesticks bristle on the distant table by the door, and 
cousins yawn on ottomans.  Cousins at the piano, cousins at the 
soda-water tray, cousins rising from the card-table, cousins 
gathered round the fire.  Standing on one side of his own peculiar 
fire (for there are two), Sir Leicester.  On the opposite side of 
the broad hearth, my Lady at her table.  Volumnia, as one of the 
more privileged cousins, in a luxurious chair between them.  Sir 
Leicester glancing, with magnificent displeasure, at the rouge and 
the pearl necklace.

"I occasionally meet on my staircase here," drawls Volumnia, whose 
thoughts perhaps are already hopping up it to bed, after a long 
evening of very desultory talk, "one of the prettiest girls, I 
think, that I ever saw in my life."

"A PROTEGEE of my Lady's," observes Sir Leicester.

"I thought so.  I felt sure that some uncommon eye must have picked 
that girl out.  She really is a marvel.  A dolly sort of beauty 
perhaps," says Miss Volumnia, reserving her own sort, "but in its 
way, perfect; such bloom I never saw!"

Sir Leicester, with his magnificent glance of displeasure at the 
rouge, appears to say so too.

"Indeed," remarks my Lady languidly, "if there is any uncommon eye 
in the case, it is Mrs. Rouncewell's, and not mine.  Rosa is her 
discovery."

"Your maid, I suppose?"

"No.  My anything; pet--secretary--messenger--I don't know what."

"You like to have her about you, as you would like to have a 
flower, or a bird, or a picture, or a poodle--no, not a poodle, 
though--or anything else that was equally pretty?" says Volumnia, 
sympathizing.  "Yes, how charming now!  And how well that 
delightful old soul Mrs. Rouncewell is looking.  She must be an 
immense age, and yet she is as active and handsome!  She is the 
dearest friend I have, positively!"

Sir Leicester feels it to be right and fitting that the housekeeper 
of Chesney Wold should be a remarkable person.  Apart from that, he 
has a real regard for Mrs. Rouncewell and likes to hear her 
praised.  So he says, "You are right, Volumnia," which Volumnia is 
extremely glad to hear.

"She has no daughter of her own, has she?"

"Mrs. Rouncewell?  No, Volumnia.  She has a son.  Indeed, she had 
two."

My Lady, whose chronic malady of boredom has been sadly aggravated 
by Volumnia this evening, glances wearily towards the candlesticks 
and heaves a noiseless sigh.

"And it is a remarkable example of the confusion into which the 
present age has fallen; of the obliteration of landmarks, the 
opening of floodgates, and the uprooting of distinctions," says Sir 
Leicester with stately gloom, "that I have been informed by Mr. 
Tulkinghorn that Mrs. Rouncewell's son has been invited to go into 
Parliament."

Miss Volumnia utters a little sharp scream.

"Yes, indeed," repeats Sir Leicester.  "Into Parliament."

"I never heard of such a thing!  Good gracious, what is the man?" 
exclaims Volumnia.

"He is called, I believe--an--ironmaster."  Sir Leicester says it 
slowly and with gravity and doubt, as not being sure but that he is 
called a lead-mistress or that the right word may be some other 
word expressive of some other relationship to some other metal.

Volumnia utters another little scream.

"He has declined the proposal, if my information from Mr. 
Tulkinghorn be correct, as I have no doubt it is.  Mr. Tulkinghorn 
being always correct and exact; still that does not," says Sir 
Leicester, "that does not lessen the anomaly, which is fraught with 
strange considerations--startling considerations, as it appears to 
me."

Miss Volumnia rising with a look candlestick-wards, Sir Leicester 
politely performs the grand tour of the drawing-room, brings one, 
and lights it at my Lady's shaded lamp.

"I must beg you, my Lady," he says while doing so, "to remain a few 
moments, for this individual of whom I speak arrived this evening 
shortly before dinner and requested in a very becoming note"--Sir 
Leicester, with his habitual regard to truth, dwells upon it--"I am 
bound to say, in a very becoming and well-expressed note, the 
favour of a short interview with yourself and MYself on the subject 
of this young girl.  As it appeared that he wished to depart to-
night, I replied that we would see him before retiring."

Miss Volumnia with a third little scream takes flight, wishing her 
hosts--O Lud!--well rid of the--what is it?--ironmaster!

The other cousins soon disperse, to the last cousin there.  Sir 
Leicester rings the bell, "Make my compliments to Mr. Rouncewell, 
in the housekeeper's apartments, and say I can receive him now."

My Lady, who has beard all this with slight attention outwardly, 
looks towards Mr. Rouncewell as he comes in.  He is a little over 
fifty perhaps, of a good figure, like his mother, and has a clear 
voice, a broad forehead from which his dark hair has retired, and a 
shrewd though open face.  He is a responsible-looking gentleman 
dressed in black, portly enough, but strong and active.  Has a 
perfectly natural and easy air and is not in the least embarrassed 
by the great presence into which he comes.

"Sir Leicester and Lady Dedlock, as I have already apologized for 
intruding on you, I cannot do better than be very brief.  I thank 
you, Sir Leicester."

The head of the Dedlocks has motioned towards a sofa between 
himself and my Lady.  Mr. Rouncewell quietly takes his seat there.

"In these busy times, when so many great undertakings are in 
progress, people like myself have so many workmen in so many places 
that we are always on the flight."

Sir Leicester is content enough that the ironmaster should feel 
that there is no hurry there; there, in that ancient house, rooted 
in that quiet park, where the ivy and the moss have had time to 
mature, and the gnarled and warted elms and the umbrageous oaks 
stand deep in the fern and leaves of a hundred years; and where the 
sun-dial on the terrace has dumbly recorded for centuries that time 
which was as much the property of every Dedlock--while he lasted--
as the house and lands.  Sir Leicester sits down in an easy-chair, 
opposing his repose and that of Chesney Wold to the restless 
flights of ironmasters.

"Lady Dedlock has been so kind," proceeds Mr. Rouncewell with a 
respectful glance and a bow that way, "as to place near her a young 
beauty of the name of Rosa.  Now, my son has fallen in love with 
Rosa and has asked my consent to his proposing marriage to her and 
to their becoming engaged if she will take him--which I suppose she 
will.  I have never seen Rosa until to-day, but I have some 
confidence in my son's good sense--even in love.  I find her what 
he represents her, to the best of my judgment; and my mother speaks 
of her with great commendation."

"She in all respects deserves it," says my Lady.

"I am happy, Lady Dedlock, that you say so, and I need not comment 
on the value to me of your kind opinion of her."

"That," observes Sir Leicester with unspeakable grandeur, for he 
thinks the ironmaster a little too glib, "must be quite 
unnecessary."

"Quite unnecessary, Sir Leicester.  Now, my son is a very young 
man, and Rosa is a very young woman.  As I made my way, so my son 
must make his; and his being married at present is out of the 
question.  But supposing I gave my consent to his engaging himself 
to this pretty girl, if this pretty girl will engage herself to 
him, I think it a piece of candour to say at once--I am sure, Sir 
Leicester and Lady Dedlock, you will understand and excuse me--I 
should make it a condition that she did not remain at Chesney Wold.  
Therefore, before communicating further with my son, I take the 
liberty of saying that if her removal would be in any way 
inconvenient or objectionable, I will hold the matter over with him 
for any reasonable time and leave it precisely where it is."

Not remain at Chesney Wold!  Make it a condition!  All Sir 
Leicester's old misgivings relative to Wat Tyler and the people in 
the iron districts who do nothing but turn out by torchlight come 
in a shower upon his head, the fine grey hair of which, as well as 
of his whiskers, actually stirs with indignation.

"Am I to understand, sir," says Sir Leicester, "and is my Lady to 
understand"--he brings her in thus specially, first as a point of 
gallantry, and next as a point of prudence, having great reliance 
on her sense--"am I to understand, Mr. Rouncewell, and is my Lady 
to understand, sir, that you consider this young woman too good for 
Chesney Wold or likely to be injured by remaining here?"

"Certainly not, Sir Leicester,"

"I am glad to hear it."  Sir Leicester very lofty indeed.

"Pray, Mr. Rouncewell," says my Lady, warning Sir Leicester off 
with the slightest gesture of her pretty hand, as if he were a fly, 
"explain to me what you mean."

"Willingly, Lady Dedlock.  There is nothing I could desire more."

Addressing her composed face, whose intelligence, however, is too 
quick and active to be concealed by any studied impassiveness, 
however habitual, to the strong Saxon face of the visitor, a 
picture of resolution and perseverance, my Lady listens with 
attention, occasionally slightly bending her head.

"I am the son of your housekeeper, Lady Dedlock, and passed my 
childhood about this house.  My mother has lived here half a 
century and will die here I have no doubt.  She is one of those 
examples--perhaps as good a one as there is--of love, and 
attachment, and fidelity in such a nation, which England may well 
be proud of, but of which no order can appropriate the whole pride 
or the whole merit, because such an instance bespeaks high worth on 
two sides--on the great side assuredly, on the small one no less 
assuredly."

Sir Leicester snorts a little to hear the law laid down in this 
way, but in his honour and his love of truth, he freely, though 
silently, admits the justice of the ironmaster's proposition.

"Pardon me for saying what is so obvious, but I wouldn't have it 
hastily supposed," with the least turn of his eyes towards Sir 
Leicester, "that I am ashamed of my mother's position here, or 
wanting in all just respect for Chesney Wold and the family.  I 
certainly may have desired--I certainly have desired, Lady Dedlock
--that my mother should retire after so many years and end her days 
with me.  But as I have found that to sever this strong bond would 
be to break her heart, I have long abandoned that idea."

Sir Leicester very magnificent again at the notion of Mrs. 
Rouncewell being spirited off from her natural home to end her days 
with an ironmaster.

"I have been," proceeds the visitor in a modest, clear way, "an 
apprentice and a workman.  I have lived on workman's wages, years 
and years, and beyond a certain point have had to educate myself.  
My wife was a foreman's daughter, and plainly brought up.  We have 
three daughters besides this son of whom I have spoken, and being 
fortunately able to give them greater advantages than we have had 
ourselves, we have educated them well, very well.  It has been one 
of our great cares and pleasures to make them worthy of any 
station."

A little boastfulness in his fatherly tone here, as if he added in 
his heart, "even of the Chesney Wold station."  Not a little more 
magnificence, therefore, on the part of Sir Leicester.

"All this is so frequent, Lady Dedlock, where I live, and among the 
class to which I belong, that what would be generally called 
unequal marriages are not of such rare occurrence with us as 
elsewhere.  A son will sometimes make it known to his father that 
he has fallen in love, say, with a young woman in the factory.  The 
father, who once worked in a factory himself, will be a little 
disappointed at first very possibly.  It may be that he had other 
views for his son.  However, the chances are that having 
ascertained the young woman to be of unblemished character, he will 
say to his son, 'I must be quite sure you are in earnest here.  
This is a serious matter for both of you.  Therefore I shall have 
this girl educated for two years,' or it may be, 'I shall place 
this girl at the same school with your sisters for such a time, 
during which you will give me your word and honour to see her only 
so often.  If at the expiration of that time, when she has so far 
profited by her advantages as that you may be upon a fair equality, 
you are both in the same mind, I will do my part to make you 
happy.'  I know of several cases such as I describe, my Lady, and I 
think they indicate to me my own course now."

Sir Leicester's magnificence explodes.  Calmly, but terribly.

"Mr. Rouncewell," says Sir Leicester with his right hand in the 
breast of his blue coat, the attitude of state in which he is 
painted in the gallery, "do you draw a parallel between Chesney 
Wold and a--"  Here he resists a disposition to choke, "a factory?"

"I need not reply, Sir Leicester, that the two places are very 
different; but for the purposes of this case, I think a parallel 
may be justly drawn between them."

Sir Leicester directs his majestic glance down one side of the long 
drawing-room and up the other before he can believe that he is 
awake.

"Are you aware, sir, that this young woman whom my Lady--my Lady--
has placed near her person was brought up at the village school 
outside the gates?"

"Sir Leicester, I am quite aware of it.  A very good school it is, 
and handsomely supported by this family."

"Then, Mr. Rouncewell," returns Sir Leicester, "the application of 
what you have said is, to me, incomprehensible."

"Will it be more comprehensible, Sir Leicester, if I say," the 
ironmaster is reddening a little, "that I do not regard the village 
school as teaching everything desirable to be known by my son's 
wife?"

From the village school of Chesney Wold, intact as it is this 
minute, to the whole framework of society; from the whole framework 
of society, to the aforesaid framework receiving tremendous cracks 
in consequence of people (iron-masters, lead-mistresses, and what 
not) not minding their catechism, and getting out of the station 
unto which they are called--necessarily and for ever, according to 
Sir Leicester's rapid logic, the first station in which they happen 
to find themselves; and from that, to their educating other people 
out of THEIR stations, and so obliterating the landmarks, and 
opening the floodgates, and all the rest of it; this is the swift 
progress of the Dedlock mind.

"My Lady, I beg your pardon.  Permit me, for one moment!"  She has 
given a faint indication of intending to speak.  "Mr. Rouncewell, 
our views of duty, and our views of station, and our views of 
education, and our views of--in short, ALL our views--are so 
diametrically opposed, that to prolong this discussion must be 
repellent to your feelings and repellent to my own.  This young 
woman is honoured with my Lady's notice and favour.  If she wishes 
to withdraw herself from that notice and favour or if she chooses 
to place herself under the influence of any one who may in his 
peculiar opinions--you will allow me to say, in his peculiar 
opinions, though I readily admit that he is not accountable for 
them to me--who may, in his peculiar opinions, withdraw her from 
that notice and favour, she is at any time at liberty to do so.  We 
are obliged to you for the plainness with which you have spoken.  
It will have no effect of itself, one way or other, on the young 
woman's position here.  Beyond this, we can make no terms; and here 
we beg--if you will be so good--to leave the subject."

The visitor pauses a moment to give my Lady an opportunity, but she 
says nothing.  He then rises and replies, "Sir Leicester and Lady 
Dedlock, allow me to thank you for your attention and only to 
observe that I shall very seriously recommend my son to conquer his 
present inclinations.  Good night!"

"Mr. Rouncewell," says Sir Leicester with all the nature of a 
gentleman shining in him, "it is late, and the roads are dark.  I 
hope your time is not so precious but that you will allow my Lady 
and myself to offer you the hospitality of Chesney Wold, for to-
night at least."

"I hope so," adds my Lady.

"I am much obliged to you, but I have to travel all night in order 
to reach a distant part of the country punctually at an appointed 
time in the morning."

Therewith the ironmaster takes his departure, Sir Leicester ringing 
the bell and my Lady rising as he leaves the room.

When my Lady goes to her boudoir, she sits down thoughtfully by the 
fire, and inattentive to the Ghost's Walk, looks at Rosa, writing 
in an inner room.  Presently my Lady calls her.

"Come to me, child.  Tell me the truth.  Are you in love?"

"Oh! My Lady!"

My Lady, looking at the downcast and blushing face, says smiling, 
"Who is it?  Is it Mrs. Rouncewell's grandson?"

"Yes, if you please, my Lady.  But I don't know that I am in love 
with him--yet."

"Yet, you silly little thing!  Do you know that he loves YOU, yet?"

"I think he likes me a little, my Lady."  And Rosa bursts into 
tears.

Is this Lady Dedlock standing beside the village beauty, smoothing 
her dark hair with that motherly touch, and watching her with eyes 
so full of musing interest?  Aye, indeed it is!

"Listen to me, child.  You are young and true, and I believe you 
are attached to me."

"Indeed I am, my Lady.  Indeed there is nothing in the world I 
wouldn't do to show how much."

"And I don't think you would wish to leave me just yet, Rosa, even 
for a lover?"

"No, my Lady!  Oh, no!"  Rosa looks up for the first time, quite 
frightened at the thought.

"Confide in me, my child.  Don't fear me.  I wish you to be happy, 
and will make you so--if I can make anybody happy on this earth."

Rosa, with fresh tears, kneels at her feet and kisses her hand.  My 
Lady takes the hand with which she has caught it, and standing with 
her eyes fixed on the fire, puts it about and about between her own 
two hands, and gradually lets it fall.  Seeing her so absorbed, 
Rosa softly withdraws; but still my Lady's eyes are on the fire.

In search of what?  Of any hand that is no more, of any hand that 
never was, of any touch that might have magically changed her life?  
Or does she listen to the Ghost's Walk and think what step does it 
most resemble?  A man's?  A woman's?  The pattering of a little 
child's feet, ever coming on--on--on?  Some melancholy influence is 
upon her, or why should so proud a lady close the doors and sit 
alone upon the hearth so desolate?

Volumnia is away next day, and all the cousins are scattered before 
dinner.  Not a cousin of the batch but is amazed to hear from Sir 
Leicester at breakfast-time of the obliteration of landmarks, and 
opening of floodgates, and cracking of the framework of society, 
manifested through Mrs. Rouncewell's son.  Not a cousin of the 
batch but is really indignant, and connects it with the feebleness 
of William Buffy when in office, and really does feel deprived of a 
stake in the country--or the pension list--or something--by fraud 
and wrong.  As to Volumnia, she is handed down the great staircase 
by Sir Leicester, as eloquent upon the theme as if there were a 
general rising in the north of England to obtain her rouge-pot and 
pearl necklace.  And thus, with a clatter of maids and valets--for 
it is one appurtenance of their cousinship that however difficult 
they may find it to keep themselves, they MUST keep maids and 
valets--the cousins disperse to the four winds of heaven; and the 
one wintry wind that blows to-day shakes a shower from the trees 
near the deserted house, as if all the cousins had been changed 
into leaves.



CHAPTER XXIX

The Young Man


Chesney Wold is shut up, carpets are rolled into great scrolls in 
corners of comfortless rooms, bright damask does penance in brown 
holland, carving and gilding puts on mortification, and the Dedlock 
ancestors retire from the light of day again.  Around and around 
the house the leaves fall thick, but never fast, for they come 
circling down with a dead lightness that is sombre and slow.  Let 
the gardener sweep and sweep the turf as he will, and press the 
leaves into full barrows, and wheel them off, still they lie ankle-
deep.  Howls the shrill wind round Chesney Wold; the sharp rain 
beats, the windows rattle, and the chimneys growl.  Mists hide in 
the avenues, veil the points of view, and move in funeral-wise 
across the rising grounds.  On all the house there is a cold, blank 
smell like the smell of a little church, though something dryer, 
suggesting that the dead and buried Dedlocks walk there in the long 
nights and leave the flavour of their graves behind them.

But the house in town, which is rarely in the same mind as Chesney 
Wold at the same time, seldom rejoicing when it rejoices or 
mourning when it mourns, expecting when a Dedlock dies--the house 
in town shines out awakened.  As warm and bright as so much state 
may be, as delicately redolent of pleasant scents that bear no 
trace of winter as hothouse flowers can make it, soft and hushed so 
that the ticking of the clocks and the crisp burning of the fires 
alone disturb the stillness in the rooms, it seems to wrap those 
chilled bones of Sir Leicester's in rainbow-coloured wool.  And Sir 
Leicester is glad to repose in dignified contentment before the 
great fire in the library, condescendingly perusing the backs of 
his books or honouring the fine arts with a glance of approbation.  
For he has his pictures, ancient and modern.  Some of the Fancy 
Ball School in which art occasionally condescends to become a 
master, which would be best catalogued like the miscellaneous 
articles in a sale.  As '"Three high-backed chairs, a table and 
cover, long-necked bottle (containing wine), one flask, one Spanish 
female's costume, three-quarter face portrait of Miss Jogg the 
model, and a suit of armour containing Don Quixote."  Or "One stone 
terrace (cracked), one gondola in distance, one Venetian senator's 
dress complete, richly embroidered white satin costume with profile 
portrait of Miss Jogg the model, one Scimitar superbly mounted in 
gold with jewelled handle, elaborate Moorish dress (very rare), and 
Othello."

Mr. Tulkinghorn comes and goes pretty often, there being estate 
business to do, leases to be renewed, and so on.  He sees my Lady 
pretty often, too; and he and she are as composed, and as 
indifferent, and take as little heed of one another, as ever.  Yet 
it may be that my Lady fears this Mr. Tulkinghorn and that he knows 
it.  It may be that he pursues her doggedly and steadily, with no 
touch of compunction, remorse, or pity.  It may be that her beauty 
and all the state and brilliancy surrounding her only gives him the 
greater zest for what he is set upon and makes him the more 
inflexible in it.  Whether he be cold and cruel, whether immovable 
in what he has made his duty, whether absorbed in love of power, 
whether determined to have nothing hidden from him in ground where 
he has burrowed among secrets all his life, whether he in his heart 
despises the splendour of which he is a distant beam, whether he is 
always treasuring up slights and offences in the affability of his 
gorgeous clients--whether he be any of this, or all of this, it may 
be that my Lady had better have five thousand pairs of fashionahle 
eyes upon her, in distrustful vigilance, than the two eyes of this 
rusty lawyer with his wisp of neckcloth and his dull black breeches 
tied with ribbons at the knees.

Sir Leicester sits in my Lady's room--that room in which Mr. 
Tulkinghorn read the affidavit in Jarndyce and Jarndyce--
particularly complacent.  My Lady, as on that day, sits before the 
fire with her screen in her hand.  Sir Leicester is particularly 
complacent because he has found in his newspaper some congenial 
remarks bearing directly on the floodgates and the framework of 
society.  They apply so happily to the late case that Sir Leicester 
has come from the library to my Lady's room expressly to read them 
aloud.  "The man who wrote this article," he observes by way of 
preface, nodding at the fire as if he were nodding down at the man 
from a mount, "has a well-balanced mind."

The man's mind is not so well balanced but that he bores my Lady, 
who, after a languid effort to listen, or rather a languid 
resignation of herself to a show of listening, becomes distraught 
and falls into a contemplation of the fire as if it were her fire 
at Chesney Wold, and she had never left it.  Sir Leicester, quite 
unconscious, reads on through his double eye-glass, occasionally 
stopping to remove his glass and express approval, as "Very true 
indeed," "Very properly put," "I have frequently made the same 
remark myself," invariably losing his place after each observation, 
and going up and down the column to find it again.

Sir Leicester is reading with infinite gravity and state when the 
door opens, and the Mercury in powder makes this strange 
announcement, "The young man, my Lady, of the name of Guppy."

Sir Leicester pauses, stares, repeats in a killing voice, "The 
young man of the name of Guppy?"

Looking round, he beholds the young man of the name of Guppy, much 
discomfited and not presenting a very impressive letter of 
introduction in his manner and appearance.

"Pray," says Sir Leicester to Mercury, "what do you mean by 
announcing with this abruptness a young man of the name of Guppy?"

"I beg your pardon, Sir Leicester, but my Lady said she would see 
the young man whenever he called.  I was not aware that you were 
here, Sir Leicester."

With this apology, Mercury directs a scornful and indignant look at 
the young man of the name of Guppy which plainly says, "What do you 
come calling here for and getting ME into a row?"

"It's quite right.  I gave him those directions," says my Lady.  
"Let the young man wait."

"By no means, my Lady.  Since he has your orders to come, I will 
not interrupt you."  Sir Leicester in his gallantry retires, rather 
declining to accept a bow from the young man as he goes out and 
majestically supposing him to be some shoemaker of intrusive 
appearance.

Lady Dedlock looks imperiously at her visitor when the servant has 
left the room, casting her eyes over him from head to foot.  She 
suffers him to stand by the door and asks him what he wants.

"That your ladyship would have the kindness to oblige me with a 
little conversation," returns Mr. Guppy, embarrassed.

"You are, of course, the person who has written me so many 
letters?"

"Several, your ladyship.  Several before your ladyship condescended 
to favour me with an answer."

"And could you not take the same means of rendering a Conversation 
unnecessary?  Can you not still?"

Mr. Guppy screws his mouth into a silent "No!" and shakes his head.

"You have been strangely importunate.  If it should appear, after 
all, that what you have to say does not concern me--and I don't 
know how it can, and don't expect that it will--you will allow me 
to cut you short with but little ceremony.  Say what you have to 
say, if you please."

My Lady, with a careless toss of her screen, turns herself towards 
the fire again, sitting almost with her back to the young man of 
the name of Guppy.

"With your ladyship's permission, then," says the young man, "I 
will now enter on my business.  Hem!  I am, as I told your ladyship 
in my first letter, in the law.  Being in the law, I have learnt 
the habit of not committing myself in writing, and therefore I did 
not mention to your ladyship the name of the firm with which I am 
connected and in which my standing--and I may add income--is 
tolerably good.  I may now state to your ladyship, in confidence, 
that the name of that firm is Kenge and Carboy, of Lincoln's Inn, 
which may not be altogether unknown to your ladyship in connexion 
with the case in Chancery of Jarndyce and Jarndyce."

My Lady's figure begins to be expressive of some attention.  She 
has ceased to toss the screen and holds it as if she were 
listening.

"Now, I may say to your ladyship at once," says Mr. Guppy, a little 
emboldened, "it is no matter arising out of Jarndyce and Jarndyce 
that made me so desirous to speak to your ladyship, which conduct I 
have no doubt did appear, and does appear, obtrusive--in fact, 
almost blackguardly."

After waiting for a moment to receive some assurance to the 
contrary, and not receiving any, Mr. Guppy proceeds, "If it had 
been Jarndyce and Jarndyce, I should have gone at once to your 
ladyship's solicitor, Mr. Tulkinghorn, of the Fields.  I have the 
pleasure of being acquainted with Mr. Tulkinghorn--at least we move 
when we meet one another--and if it had been any business of that 
sort, I should have gone to him."

My Lady turns a little round and says, "You had better sit down."

"Thank your ladyship."  Mr. Guppy does so.  "Now, your ladyship"--
Mr. Guppy refers to a little slip of paper on which he has made 
small notes of his line of argument and which seems to involve him 
in the densest obscurity whenever he looks at it--"I--Oh, yes!--I 
place myself entirely in your ladyship's hands.  If your ladyship 
was to make any complaint to Kenge and Carboy or to Mr. Tulkinghorn 
of the present visit, I should be placed in a very disagreeable 
situation.  That, I openly admit.  Consequently, I rely upon your 
ladyship's honour."

My Lady, with a disdainful gesture of the hand that holds the 
screen, assures him of his being worth no complaint from her.

"Thank your ladyship," says Mr. Guppy; "quite satisfactory.  Now--
I--dash it!--The fact is that I put down a head or two here of the 
order of the points I thought of touching upon, and they're written 
short, and I can't quite make out what they mean.  If your ladyship 
will excuse me taking it to the window half a moment, I--"

Mr. Guppy, going to the window, tumbles into a pair of love-birds, 
to whom he says in his confusion, "I beg your pardon, I am sure."  
This does not tend to the greater legibility of his notes.  He 
murmurs, growing warm and red and holding the slip of paper now 
close to his eyes, now a long way off, "C.S.  What's C.S. for?  Oh!  
C.S.!  Oh, I know!  Yes, to be sure!"  And comes back enlightened.

"I am not aware," says Mr. Guppy, standing midway between my Lady 
and his chair, "whether your ladyship ever happened to hear of, or 
to see, a young lady of the name of Miss Esther Summerson."

My Lady's eyes look at him full.  "I saw a young lady of that name 
not long ago.  This past autumn."

"Now, did it strike your ladyship that she was like anybody?" asks 
Mr. Guppy, crossing his arms, holding his head on one side, and 
scratching the corner of his mouth with his memoranda.

My Lady removes her eyes from him no more.

"No."

"Not like your ladyship's family?"

"No."

"I think your ladyship," says Mr. Guppy, "can hardly remember Miss 
Summerson's face?"

"I remember the young lady very well.  What has this to do with 
me?"

"Your ladyship, I do assure you that having Miss Summerson's image 
imprinted on my 'eart--which I mention in confidence--I found, when 
I had the honour of going over your ladyship's mansion of Chesney 
Wold while on a short out in the county of Lincolnshire with a 
friend, such a resemblance between Miss Esther Summerson and your 
ladyship's own portrait that it completely knocked me over, so much 
so that I didn't at the moment even know what it WAS that knocked 
me over.  And now I have the honour of beholding your ladyship near 
(I have often, since that, taken the liberty of looking at your 
ladyship in your carriage in the park, when I dare say you was not 
aware of me, but I never saw your ladyship so near), it's really 
more surprising than I thought it."

Young man of the name of Guppy!  There have been times, when ladies 
lived in strongholds and had unscrupulous attendants within call, 
when that poor life of yours would NOT have been worth a minute's 
purchase, with those beautiful eyes looking at you as they look at 
this moment.

My Lady, slowly using her little hand-screen as a fan, asks him 
again what he supposes that his taste for likenesses has to do with 
her.

"Your ladyship," replies Mr. Guppy, again referring to his paper, 
"I am coming to that.  Dash these notes!  Oh!  'Mrs. Chadband.'  
Yes."  Mr. Guppy draws his chair a little forward and seats himself 
again.  My Lady reclines in her chair composedly, though with a 
trifle less of graceful ease than usual perhaps, and never falters 
in her steady gaze.  "A--stop a minute, though!"  Mr. Guppy refers 
again.  "E.S. twice?  Oh, yes!  Yes, I see my way now, right on."

Rolling up the slip of paper as an instrument to point his speech 
with, Mr. Guppy proceeds.

"Your ladyship, there is a mystery about Miss Esther Summerson's 
birth and bringing up.  I am informed of that fact because--which I 
mention in confidence--I know it in the way of my profession at 
Kenge and Carboy's.  Now, as I have already mentioned to your 
ladyship, Miss Summerson's image is imprinted on my 'eart.  If I 
could clear this mystery for her, or prove her to be well related, 
or find that having the honour to be a remote branch of your 
ladyship's family she had a right to be made a party in Jarndyce 
and Jarndyce, why, I might make a sort of a claim upon Miss 
Summerson to look with an eye of more dedicated favour on my 
proposals than she has exactly done as yet.  In fact, as yet she 
hasn't favoured them at all."

A kind of angry smile just dawns upon my Lady's face.

"Now, it's a very singular circumstance, your ladyship," says Mr. 
Guppy, "though one of those circumstances that do fall in the way 
of us professional men--which I may call myself, for though not 
admitted, yet I have had a present of my articles made to me by 
Kenge and Carboy, on my mother's advancing from the principal of 
her little income the money for the stamp, which comes heavy--that 
I have encountered the person who lived as servant with the lady 
who brought Miss Summerson up before Mr. Jarndyce took charge of 
her.  That lady was a Miss Barbary, your ladyship."

Is the dead colour on my Lady's face reflected from the screen 
which has a green silk ground and which she holds in her raised 
hand as if she had forgotten it, or is it a dreadful paleness that 
has fallen on her?

"Did your ladyship," says Mr. Guppy, "ever happen to hear of Miss 
Barbary?"

"I don't know.  I think so.  Yes."

"Was Miss Barbary at all connected with your ladyship's family?"

My Lady's lips move, but they utter nothing.  She shakes her head.

"NOT connected?" says Mr. Guppy.  "Oh! Not to your ladyship's 
knowledge, perhaps?  Ah! But might be?  Yes."  After each of these 
interrogatories, she has inclined her head.  "Very good!  Now, this 
Miss Barbary was extremely close--seems to have been 
extraordinarily close for a female, females being generally (in 
common life at least) rather given to conversation--and my witness 
never had an idea whether she possessed a single relative.  On one 
occasion, and only one, she seems to have been confidential to my 
witness on a single point, and she then told her that the little 
girl's real name was not Esther Summerson, but Esther Hawdon."

"My God!"

Mr. Guppy stares.  Lady Dedlock sits before him looking him 
through, with the same dark shade upon her face, in the same 
attitude even to the holding of the screen, with her lips a little 
apart, her brow a little contracted, but for the moment dead.  He 
sees her consciousness return, sees a tremor pass across her frame 
like a ripple over water, sees her lips shake, sees her compose 
them by a great effort, sees her force herself back to the 
knowledge of his presence and of what he has said.  All this, so 
quickly, that her exclamation and her dead condition seem to have 
passed away like the features of those long-preserved dead bodies 
sometimes opened up in tombs, which, struck by the air like 
lightning, vanish in a breath.

"Your ladyship is acquainted with the name of Hawdon?"

"I have heard it before."

"Name of any collateral or remote branch of your ladyship's 
family?"

"No."

"Now, your ladyship," says Mr. Guppy, "I come to the last point of 
the case, so far as I have got it up.  It's going on, and I shall 
gather it up closer and closer as it goes on.  Your ladyship must 
know--if your ladyship don't happen, by any chance, to know 
already--that there was found dead at the house of a person named 
Krook, near Chancery Lane, some time ago, a law-writer in great 
distress.  Upon which law-writer there was an inquest, and which 
law-writer was an anonymous character, his name being unknown.  
But, your ladyship, I have discovered very lately that that law-
writer's name was Hawdon."

"And what is THAT to me?"

"Aye, your ladyship, that's the question!  Now, your ladyship, a 
queer thing happened after that man's death.  A lady started up, a 
disguised lady, your ladyship, who went to look at the scene of 
action and went to look at his grave.  She hired a crossing-
sweeping boy to show it her.  If your ladyship would wish to have 
the boy produced in corroboration of this statement, I can lay my 
hand upon him at any time."

The wretched boy is nothing to my Lady, and she does NOT wish to 
have him produced.

"Oh, I assure your ladyship it's a very queer start indeed," says 
Mr. Guppy.  "If you was to hear him tell about the rings that 
sparkled on her fingers when she took her glove off, you'd think it 
quite romantic."

There are diamonds glittering on the hand that holds the screen.  
My Lady trifles with the screen and makes them glitter more, again 
with that expression which in other times might have been so 
dangerous to the young man of the name of Guppy.

"It was supposed, your ladyship, that he left no rag or scrap 
behind him by which he could be possibly identified.  But he did.  
He left a bundle of old letters."

The screen still goes, as before.  All this time her eyes never 
once release him.

"They were taken and secreted.  And to-morrow night, your ladyship, 
they will come into my possession."

"Still I ask you, what is this to me?"

"Your ladyship, I conclude with that."  Mr. Guppy rises.  "If you 
think there's enough in this chain of circumstances put together--
in the undoubted strong likeness of this young lady to your 
ladyship, which is a positive fact for a jury; in her having been 
brought up by Miss Barbary; in Miss Barbary stating Miss 
Summerson's real name to be Hawdon; in your ladyship's knowing both 
these names VERY WELL; and in Hawdon's dying as he did--to give 
your ladyship a family interest in going further into the case, I 
will bring these papers here.  I don't know what they are, except 
that they are old letters: I have never had them in my posession 
yet.  I will bring those papers here as soon as I get them and go 
over them for the first time with your ladyship.  I have told your 
ladyship my object.  I have told your ladyship that I should be 
placed in a very disagreeable situation if any complaint was made, 
and all is in strict confidence."

Is this the full purpose of the young man of the name of Guppy, or 
has he any other?  Do his words disclose the length, breadth, 
depth, of his object and suspicion in coming here; or if not, what 
do they hide?  He is a match for my Lady there.  She may look at 
him, but he can look at the table and keep that witness-box face of 
his from telling anything.

"You may bring the letters," says my Lady, "if you choose."

"Your ladyship is not very encouraging, upon my word and honour," 
says Mr. Guppy, a little injured.

"You may bring the letters," she repeats in the same tone, "if you
--please."

"It shall he done.  I wish your ladyship good day."

On a table near her is a rich bauble of a casket, barred and 
clasped like an old strong-chest.  She, looking at him still, takes 
it to her and unlocks it.

"Oh! I assure your ladyship I am not actuated by any motives of 
that sort," says Mr. Guppy, "and I couldn't accept anything of the 
kind.  I wish your ladyship good day, and am much obliged to you 
all the same."

So the young man makes his bow and goes downstairs, where the 
supercilious Mercury does not consider himself called upon to leave 
his Olympus by the hall-fire to let the young man out.

As Sir Leicester basks in his library and dozes over his newspaper, 
is there no influence in the house to startle him, not to say to 
make the very trees at Chesney Wold fling up their knotted arms, 
the very portraits frown, the very armour stir?

No.  Words, sobs, and cries are but air, and air is so shut in and 
shut out throughout the house in town that sounds need be uttered 
trumpet-tongued indeed by my Lady in her chamber to carry any faint 
vibration to Sir Leicester's ears; and yet this cry is in the 
house, going upward from a wild figure on its knees.

"O my child, my child!  Not dead in the first hours of her life, as 
my cruel sister told me, but sternly nurtured by her, after she had 
renounced me and my name!  O my child, O my child!"



CHAPTER XXX

Esther's Narrative


Richard had been gone away some time when a visitor came to pass a 
few days with us.  It was an elderly lady.  It was Mrs. Woodcourt, 
who, having come from Wales to stay with Mrs. Bayham Badger and 
having written to my guardian, "by her son Allan's desire," to 
report that she had heard from him and that he was well "and sent 
his kind remembrances to all of us," had been invited by my 
guardian to make a visit to Bleak House.  She stayed with us nearly 
three weeks.  She took very kindly to me and was extremely 
confidential, so much so that sometimes she almost made me 
uncomfortable.  I had no right, I knew very well, to be 
uncomfortable because she confided in me, and I felt it was 
unreasonable; still, with all I could do, I could not quite help it.

She was such a sharp little lady and used to sit with her hands 
folded in each other looking so very watchful while she talked to 
me that perhaps I found that rather irksome.  Or perhaps it was her 
being so upright and trim, though I don't think it was that, 
because I thought that quaintly pleasant.  Nor can it have been the 
general expression of her face, which was very sparkling and pretty 
for an old lady.  I don't know what it was.  Or at least if I do 
now, I thought I did not then.  Or at least--but it don't matter.

Of a night when I was going upstairs to bed, she would invite me 
into her room, where she sat before the fire in a great chair; and, 
dear me, she would tell me about Morgan ap-Kerrig until I was quite 
low-spirited!  Sometimes she recited a few verses from 
Crumlinwallinwer and the Mewlinn-willinwodd (if those are the right 
names, which I dare say they are not), and would become quite fiery 
with the sentiments they expressed.  Though I never knew what they 
were (being in Welsh), further than that they were highly 
eulogistic of the lineage of Morgan ap-Kerrig.

"So, Miss Summerson," she would say to me with stately triumph, 
"this, you see, is the fortune inherited by my son.  Wherever my 
son goes, he can claim kindred with Ap-Kerrig.  He may not have 
money, but he always has what is much better--family, my dear."

I had my doubts of their caring so very much for Morgan ap-Kerrig 
in India and China, but of course I never expressed them.  I used 
to say it was a great thing to be so highly connected.

"It IS, my dear, a great thing," Mrs. Woodcourt would reply.  "It 
has its disadvantages; my son's choice of a wife, for instance, is 
limited by it, but the matrimonial choice of the royal family is 
limited in much the same manner."

Then she would pat me on the arm and smooth my dress, as much as to 
assure me that she had a good opinion of me, the distance between 
us notwithstanding.

"Poor Mr. Woodcourt, my dear," she would say, and always with some 
emotion, for with her lofty pedigree she had a very affectionate 
heart, "was descended from a great Highland family, the MacCoorts 
of MacCoort.  He served his king and country as an officer in the 
Royal Highlanders, and he died on the field.  My son is one of the 
last representatives of two old families.  With the blessing of 
heaven he will set them up again and unite them with another old 
family."

It was in vain for me to try to change the subject, as I used to 
try, only for the sake of novelty or perhaps because--but I need 
not be so particular.  Mrs. Woodcourt never would let me change it.

"My dear," she said one night, "you have so much sense and you look 
at the world in a quiet manner so superior to your time of life 
that it is a comfort to me to talk to you about these family 
matters of mine.  You don't know much of my son, my dear; but you 
know enough of him, I dare say, to recollect him?"

"Yes, ma'am.  I recollect him."

"Yes, my dear.  Now, my dear, I think you are a judge of character, 
and I should like to have your opinion of him."

"Oh, Mrs. Woodcourt," said I, "that is so difficult!"

"Why is it so difficult, my dear?" she returned.  "I don't see it 
myself."

"To give an opinion--"

"On so slight an acquaintance, my dear.  THAT'S true."

I didn't mean that, because Mr. Woodcourt had been at our house a 
good deal altogether and had become quite intimate with my 
guardian.  I said so, and added that he seemed to be very clever in 
his profession--we thought--and that his kindness and gentleness to 
Miss Flite were above all praise.

"You do him justice!" said Mrs. Woodcourt, pressing my hand.  "You 
define him exactly.  Allan is a dear fellow, and in his profession 
faultless.  I say it, though I am his mother.  Still, I must 
confess he is not without faults, love."

"None of us are," said I.

"Ah! But his really are faults that he might correct, and ought to 
correct," returned the sharp old lady, sharply shaking her head.  
"I am so much attached to you that I may confide in you, my dear, 
as a third party wholly disinterested, that he is fickleness 
itself."

I said I should have thought it hardly possible that he could have 
been otherwise than constant to his profession and zealous in the 
pursuit of it, judging from the reputation he had earned.

"You are right again, my dear," the old lady retorted, "but I don't 
refer to his profession, look you."

"Oh!" said I.

"No," said she.  "I refer, my dear, to his social conduct.  He is 
always paying trivial attentions to young ladies, and always has 
been, ever since he was eighteen.  Now, my dear, he has never 
really cared for any one of them and has never meant in doing this 
to do any harm or to express anything but politeness and good 
nature.  Still, it's not right, you know; is it?"

"No," said I, as she seemed to wait for me.

"And it might lead to mistaken notions, you see, my dear."

I supposed it might.

"Therefore, I have told him many times that he really should be 
more careful, both in justice to himself and in justice to others.  
And he has always said, 'Mother, I will be; but you know me better 
than anybody else does, and you know I mean no harm--in short, mean 
nothing.'  All of which is very true, my dear, but is no 
justification.  However, as he is now gone so far away and for an 
indefinite time, and as he will have good opportunities and 
introductions, we may consider this past and gone.  And you, my 
dear," said the old lady, who was now all nods and smiles, 
"regarding your dear self, my love?"

"Me, Mrs. Woodcourt?"

"Not to be always selfish, talking of my son, who has gone to seek 
his fortune and to find a wife--when do you mean to seek YOUR 
fortune and to find a husband, Miss Summerson?  Hey, look you!  Now 
you blush!"

I don't think I did blush--at all events, it was not important if I 
did--and I said my present fortune perfectly contented me and I had 
no wish to change it.

"Shall I tell you what I always think of you and the fortune yet to 
come for you, my love?" said Mrs. Woodcourt.

"If you believe you are a good prophet," said I. 

"Why, then, it is that you will marry some one very rich and very 
worthy, much older--five and twenty years, perhaps--than yourself.  
And you will be an excellent wife, and much beloved, and very 
happy."

"That is a good fortune," said I.  "But why is it to be mine?"

"My dear," she returned, "there's suitability in it--you are so 
busy, and so neat, and so peculiarly situated altogether that 
there's suitability in it, and it will come to pass.  And nobody, 
my love, will congratulate you more sincerely on such a marriage 
than I shall."

It was curious that this should make me uncomfortable, but I think 
it did.  I know it did.  It made me for some part of that night 
uncomfortable.  I was so ashamed of my folly that I did not like to 
confess it even to Ada, and that made me more uncomfortable still.  
I would have given anything not to have been so much in the bright 
old lady's confidence if I could have possibly declined it.  It 
gave me the most inconsistent opinions of her.  At one time I 
thought she was a story-teller, and at another time that she was 
the pink of truth.  Now I suspected that she was very cunning, next 
moment I believed her honest Welsh heart to be perfectly innocent 
and simple.  And after all, what did it matter to me, and why did 
it matter to me?  Why could not I, going up to bed with my basket 
of keys, stop to sit down by her fire and accommodate myself for a 
little while to her, at least as well as to anybody else, and not 
trouble myself about the harmless things she said to me?  Impelled 
towards her, as I certainly was, for I was very anxious that she 
should like me and was very glad indeed that she did, why should I 
harp afterwards, with actual distress and pain, on every word she 
said and weigh it over and over again in twenty scales?  Why was it 
so worrying to me to have her in our house, and confidential to me 
every night, when I yet felt that it was better and safer somehow 
that she should be there than anywhere else?  These were 
perplexities and contradictions that I could not account for.  At 
least, if I could--but I shall come to all that by and by, and it 
is mere idleness to go on about it now.

So when Mrs. Woodcourt went away, I was sorry to lose her but was 
relieved too.  And then Caddy Jellyby came down, and Caddy brought 
such a packet of domestic news that it gave us abundant occupation.

First Caddy declared (and would at first declare nothing else) that 
I was the best adviser that ever was known.  This, my pet said, was 
no news at all; and this, I said, of course, was nonsense.  Then 
Caddy told us that she was going to be married in a month and that 
if Ada and I would be her bridesmaids, she was the happiest girl in 
the world.  To be sure, this was news indeed; and I thought we 
never should have done talking about it, we had so much to say to 
Caddy, and Caddy had so much to say to us.

It seemed that Caddy's unfortunate papa had got over his 
bankruptcy--"gone through the Gazette," was the expression Caddy 
used, as if it were a tunnel--with the general clemency and 
commiseration of his creditors, and had got rid of his affairs in 
some blessed manner without succeeding in understanding them, and 
had given up everything he possessed (which was not worth much, I 
should think, to judge from the state of the furniture), and had 
satisfied every one concerned that he could do no more, poor man.  
So, he had been honourably dismissed to "the office" to begin the 
world again.  What he did at the office, I never knew; Caddy said 
he was a "custom-house and general agent," and the only thing I 
ever understood about that business was that when he wanted money 
more than usual he went to the docks to look for it, and hardly 
ever found it.

As soon as her papa had tranquillized his mind by becoming this 
shorn lamb, and they had removed to a furnished lodging in Hatton 
Garden (where I found the children, when I afterwards went there, 
cutting the horse hair out of the seats of the chairs and choking 
themselves with it), Caddy had brought about a meeting between him 
and old Mr. Turveydrop; and poor Mr. Jellyby, being very humble and 
meek, had deferred to Mr. Turveydrop's deportment so submissively 
that they had become excellent friends.  By degrees, old Mr. 
Turveydrop, thus familiarized with the idea of his son's marriage, 
had worked up his parental feelings to the height of contemplating 
that event as being near at hand and had given his gracious consent 
to the young couple commencing housekeeping at the academy in 
Newman Street when they would.

"And your papa, Caddy.  What did he say?"

"Oh! Poor Pa," said Caddy, "only cried and said he hoped we might 
get on better than he and Ma had got on.  He didn't say so before 
Prince, he only said so to me.  And he said, 'My poor girl, you 
have not been very well taught how to make a home for your husband, 
but unless you mean with all your heart to strive to do it, you bad 
better murder him than marry him--if you really love him.'"

"And how did you reassure him, Caddy?"

"Why, it was very distressing, you know, to see poor Pa so low and 
hear him say such terrible things, and I couldn't help crying 
myself.  But I told him that I DID mean it with all my heart and 
that I hoped our house would be a place for him to come and find 
some comfort in of an evening and that I hoped and thought I could 
be a better daughter to him there than at home.  Then I mentioned 
Peepy's coming to stay with me, and then Pa began to cry again and 
said the children were Indians."

"Indians, Caddy?"

"Yes," said Caddy, "wild Indians.  And Pa said"--here she began to 
sob, poor girl, not at all like the happiest girl in the world--
"that he was sensible the best thing that could happen to them was 
their being all tomahawked together."

Ada suggested that it was comfortable to know that Mr. Jellyby did 
not mean these destructive sentiments.

"No, of course I know Pa wouldn't like his family to be weltering 
in their blood," said Caddy, "but he means that they are very 
unfortunate in being Ma's children and that he is very unfortunate 
in being Ma's husband; and I am sure that's true, though it seems 
unnatural to say so."

I asked Caddy if Mrs. Jellyby knew that her wedding-day was fixed.

"Oh! You know what Ma is, Esther," she returned.  "It's impossible 
to say whether she knows it or not.  She has been told it often 
enough; and when she IS told it, she only gives me a placid look, 
as if I was I don't know what--a steeple in the distance," said 
Caddy with a sudden idea; "and then she shakes her head and says 
'Oh, Caddy, Caddy, what a tease you are!' and goes on with the 
Borrioboola letters."

"And about your wardrobe, Caddy?" said I.  For she was under no 
restraint with us.

"Well, my dear Esther,'' she returned, drying her eyes, "I must do 
the best I can and trust to my dear Prince never to have an unkind 
remembrance of my coming so shabbily to him.  If the question 
concerned an outfit for Borrioboola, Ma would know all about it and 
would be quite excited.  Being what it is, she neither knows nor 
cares."

Caddy was not at all deficient in natural affection for her mother, 
but mentioned this with tears as an undeniable fact, which I am 
afraid it was.  We were sorry for the poor dear girl and found so 
much to admire in the good disposition which had survived under 
such discouragement that we both at once (I mean Ada and I) 
proposed a little scheme that made her perfectly joyful.  This was 
her staying with us for three weeks, my staying with her for one, 
and our all three contriving and cutting out, and repairing, and 
sewing, and saving, and doing the very best we could think of to 
make the most of her stock.  My guardian being as pleased with the 
idea as Caddy was, we took her home next day to arrange the matter 
and brought her out again in triumph with her boxes and all the 
purchases that could be squeezed out of a ten-pound note, which Mr. 
Jellyby had found in the docks I suppose, but which he at all 
events gave her.  What my guardian would not have given her if we 
had encouraged him, it would be difficult to say, but we thought it 
right to compound for no more than her wedding-dress and bonnet.  
He agreed to this compromise, and if Caddy had ever been happy in 
her life, she was happy when we sat down to work.

She was clumsy enough with her needle, poor girl, and pricked her 
fingers as much as she had been used to ink them.  She could not 
help reddening a little now and then, partly with the smart and 
partly with vexation at being able to do no better, but she soon 
got over that and began to improve rapidly.  So day after day she, 
and my darling, and my little maid Charley, and a milliner out of 
the town, and I, sat hard at work, as pleasantly as possible.

Over and above this, Caddy was very anxious "to learn 
housekeeping," as she said.  Now, mercy upon us!  The idea of her 
learning housekeeping of a person of my vast experience was such a 
joke that I laughed, and coloured up, and fell into a comical 
confusion when she proposed it.  However, I said, "Caddy, I am sure 
you are very welcome to learn anything that you can learn of ME, my 
dear," and I showed her all my books and methods and all my fidgety 
ways.  You would have supposed that I was showing her some 
wonderful inventions, by her study of them; and if you had seen 
her, whenever I jingled my housekeeping keys, get up and attend me, 
certainly you might have thought that there never was a greater 
imposter than I with a blinder follower than Caddy Jellyby.

So what with working and housekeeping, and lessons to Charley, and 
backgammon in the evening with my guardian, and duets with Ada, the 
three weeks slipped fast away.  Then I went home with Caddy to see 
what could be done there, and Ada and Charley remained behind to 
take care of my guardian.

When I say I went home with Caddy, I mean to the furnished lodging 
in Hatton Garden.  We went to Newman Street two or three times, 
where preparations were in progress too--a good many, I observed, 
for enhancing the comforts of old Mr. Turveydrop, and a few for 
putting the newly married couple away cheaply at the top of the 
house--but our great point was to make the furnished lodging decent 
for the wedding-breakfast and to imbue Mrs. Jellyby beforehand with 
some faint sense of the occasion.

The latter was the more difficult thing of the two because Mrs. 
Jellyby and an unwholesome boy occupied the front sitting-room (the 
back one was a mere closet), and it was littered down with waste-
paper and Borrioboolan documents, as an untidy stable might be 
littered with straw.  Mrs. Jellyby sat there all day drinking 
strong coffee, dictating, and holding Borrioboolan interviews by 
appointment.  The unwholesome boy, who seemed to me to be going 
into a decline, took his meals out of the house.  When Mr. Jellyby 
came home, he usually groaned and went down into the kitchen.  
There he got something to eat if the servant would give him 
anything, and then, feeling that he was in the way, went out and 
walked about Hatton Garden in the wet.  The poor children scrambled 
up and tumbled down the house as they had always been accustomed to 
do.

The production of these devoted little sacrifices in any 
presentable condition being quite out of the question at a week's 
notice, I proposed to Caddy that we should make them as happy as we 
could on her marriage morning in the attic where they all slept, 
and should confine our greatest efforts to her mama and her mama's 
room, and a clean breakfast.  In truth Mrs. Jellyby required a good 
deal of attention, the lattice-work up her back having widened 
considerably since I first knew her and her hair looking like the 
mane of a dustman's horse.

Thinking that the display of Caddy's wardrobe would be the best 
means of approaching the subject, I invited Mrs. Jellyby to come 
and look at it spread out on Caddy's bed in the evening after the 
unwholesome boy was gone.

"My dear Miss Summerson," said she, rising from her desk with her 
usual sweetness of temper, "these are really ridiculous 
preparations, though your assisting them is a proof of your 
kindness.  There is something so inexpressibly absurd to me in the 
idea of Caddy being married!  Oh, Caddy, you silly, silly, silly 
puss!"

She came upstairs with us notwithstanding and looked at the clothes 
in her customary far-off manner.  They suggested one distinct idea 
to her, for she said with her placid smile, and shaking her head, 
"My good Miss Summerson, at half the cost, this weak child might 
have been equipped for Africa!"

On our going downstairs again, Mrs. Jellyby asked me whether this 
troublesome business was really to take place next Wednesday.  And 
on my replying yes, she said, "Will my room be required, my dear 
Miss Summerson?  For it's quite impossible that I can put my papers 
away."

I took the liberty of saying that the room would certainly be 
wanted and that I thought we must put the papers away somewhere.  
"Well, my dear Miss Summerson," said Mrs. Jellyby, "you know best, 
I dare say.  But by obliging me to employ a boy, Caddy has 
embarrassed me to that extent, overwhelmed as I am with public 
business, that I don't know which way to turn.  We have a 
Ramification meeting, too, on Wednesday afternoon, and the 
inconvenience is very serious."

"It is not likely to occur again," said I, smiling.  "Caddy will be 
married but once, probably."

"That's true," Mrs. Jellyby replied; "that's true, my dear.  I 
suppose we must make the best of it!"

The next question was how Mrs. Jellyby should be dressed on the 
occasion.  I thought it very curious to see her looking on serenely 
from her writing-table while Caddy and I discussed it, occasionally 
shaking her head at us with a half-reproachful smile like a 
superior spirit who could just bear with our trifling.

The state in which her dresses were, and the extraordinary 
confusion in which she kept them, added not a little to our 
difficulty; but at length we devised something not very unlike what 
a common-place mother might wear on such an occasion.  The 
abstracted manner in which Mrs. Jellyby would deliver herself up to 
having this attire tried on by the dressmaker, and the sweetness 
with which she would then observe to me how sorry she was that I 
had not turned my thoughts to Africa, were consistent with the rest 
of her behaviour.

The lodging was rather confined as to space, but I fancied that if 
Mrs. Jellyby's household had been the only lodgers in Saint Paul's 
or Saint Peter's, the sole advantage they would have found in the 
size of the building would have been its affording a great deal of 
room to be dirty in.  I believe that nothing belonging to the 
family which it had been possible to break was unbroken at the time 
of those preparations for Caddy's marriage, that nothing which it 
had been possible to spoil in any way was unspoilt, and that no 
domestic object which was capable of collecting dirt, from a dear 
child's knee to the door-plate, was without as much dirt as could 
well accumulate upon it.

Poor Mr. Jellyby, who very seldom spoke and almost always sat when 
he was at home with his head against the wall, became interested 
when he saw that Caddy and I were attempting to establish some 
order among all this waste and ruin and took off his coat to help.  
But such wonderful things came tumbling out of the closets when 
they were opened--bits of mouldy pie, sour bottles, Mrs. Jellyby's 
caps, letters, tea, forks, odd boots and shoes of children, 
firewood, wafers, saucepan-lids, damp sugar in odds and ends of 
paper bags, footstools, blacklead brushes, bread, Mrs. Jellyby's 
bonnets, books with butter sticking to the binding, guttered candle 
ends put out by being turned upside down in broken candlesticks, 
nutshells, heads and tails of shrimps, dinner-mats, gloves, coffee-
grounds, umbrellas--that he looked frightened, and left off again.  
But he came regularly every evening and sat without his coat, with 
his head against the wall, as though he would have helped us if he 
had known how.

"Poor Pa!" said Caddy to me on the night before the great day, when 
we really had got things a little to rights.  "It seems unkind to 
leave him, Esther.  But what could I do if I stayed!  Since I first 
knew you, I have tidied and tidied over and over again, but it's 
useless.  Ma and Africa, together, upset the whole house directly.  
We never have a servant who don't drink.  Ma's ruinous to 
everything."

Mr. Jellyby could not hear what she said, but he seemed very low 
indeed and shed tears, I thought.

"My heart aches for him; that it does!" sobbed Caddy.  "I can't 
help thinking to-night, Esther, how dearly I hope to be happy with 
Prince, and how dearly Pa hoped, I dare say, to be happy with Ma.  
What a disappointed life!"

"My dear Caddy!" said Mr. Jellyby, looking slowly round from the 
wail.  It was the first time, I think, I ever heard him say three 
words together.

"Yes, Pa!" cried Caddy, going to him and embracing him 
affectionately.

"My dear Caddy," said Mr. Jellyby.  "Never have--"

"Not Prince, Pa?" faltered Caddy.  "Not have Prince?"

"Yes, my dear," said Mr. Jellyby.  "Have him, certainly.  But, 
never have--"

I mentioned in my account of our first visit in Thavies Inn that 
Richard described Mr. Jellyby as frequently opening his mouth after 
dinner without saying anything.  It was a habit of his.  He opened 
his mouth now a great many times and shook his head in a melancholy 
manner.

"What do you wish me not to have?  Don't have what, dear Pa?" asked 
Caddy, coaxing him, with her arms round his neck.

"Never have a mission, my dear child."

Mr. Jellyby groaned and laid his head against the wall again, and 
this was the only time I ever heard him make any approach to 
expressing his sentiments on the Borrioboolan question.  I suppose 
he had been more talkative and lively once, but he seemed to have 
been completely exhausted long before I knew him.

I thought Mrs. Jellyby never would have left off serenely looking 
over her papers and drinking coffee that night.  It was twelve 
o'clock before we could obtain possession of the room, and the 
clearance it required then was so discouraging that Caddy, who was 
almost tired out, sat down in the middle of the dust and cried.  
But she soon cheered up, and we did wonders with it before we went 
to bed.

In the morning it looked, by the aid of a few flowers and a 
quantity of soap and water and a little arrangement, quite gay.  
The plain breakfast made a cheerful show, and Caddy was perfectly 
charming.  But when my darling came, I thought--and I think now--
that I never had seen such a dear face as my beautiful pet's.

We made a little feast for the children upstairs, and we put Peepy 
at the head of the table, and we showed them Caddy in her bridal 
dress, and they clapped their hands and hurrahed, and Caddy cried 
to think that she was going away from them and hugged them over and 
over again until we brought Prince up to fetch her away--when, I am 
sorry to say, Peepy bit him.  Then there was old Mr. Turveydrop 
downstairs, in a state of deportment not to be expressed, benignly 
blessing Caddy and giving my guardian to understand that his son's 
happiness was his own parental work and that he sacrificed personal 
considerations to ensure it.  "My dear sir," said Mr. Turveydrop, 
"these young people will live with me; my house is large enough for 
their accommodation, and they shall not want the shelter of my 
roof.  I could have wished--you will understand the allusion, Mr. 
Jarndyce, for you remember my illustrious patron the Prince Regent
--I could have wished that my son had married into a family where 
there was more deportment, but the will of heaven be done!"

Mr. and Mrs. Pardiggle were of the party--Mr. Pardiggle, an 
obstinate-looking man with a large waistcoat and stubbly hair, who 
was always talking in a loud bass voice about his mite, or Mrs. 
Pardiggle's mite, or their five boys' mites.  Mr. Quale, with his 
hair brushed back as usual and his knobs of temples shining very 
much, was also there, not in the character of a disappointed lover, 
but as the accepted of a young--at least, an unmarried--lady, a 
Miss Wisk, who was also there.  Miss Wisk's mission, my guardian 
said, was to show the world that woman's mission was man's mission 
and that the only genuine mission of both man and woman was to be 
always moving declaratory resolutions about things in general at 
public meetings.  The guests were few, but were, as one might 
expect at Mrs. Jellyby's, all devoted to public objects only.  
Besides those I have mentioned, there was an extremely dirty lady 
with her bonnet all awry and the ticketed price of her dress still 
sticking on it, whose neglected home, Caddy told me, was like a 
filthy wilderness, but whose church was like a fancy fair.  A very 
contentious gentleman, who said it was his mission to be 
everybody's brother but who appeared to be on terms of coolness 
with the whole of his large family, completed the party.

A party, having less in common with such an occasion, could hardly 
have been got together by any ingenuity.  Such a mean mission as 
the domestic mission was the very last thing to be endured among 
them; indeed, Miss Wisk informed us, with great indignation, before 
we sat down to breakfast, that the idea of woman's mission lying 
chiefly in the narrow sphere of home was an outrageous slander on 
the part of her tyrant, man.  One other singularity was that nobody 
with a mission--except Mr. Quale, whose mission, as I think I have 
formerly said, was to be in ecstasies with everybody's mission--
cared at all for anybody's mission.  Mrs. Pardiggle being as clear 
that the only one infallible course was her course of pouncing upon 
the poor and applying benevolence to them like a strait-waistcoat; 
as Miss Wisk was that the only practical thing for the world was 
the emancipation of woman from the thraldom of her tyrant, man.  
Mrs. Jellyby, all the while, sat smiling at the limited vision that 
could see anything but Borrioboola-Gha.

But I am anticipating now the purport of our conversation on the 
ride home instead of first marrying Caddy.  We all went to church, 
and Mr. Jellyby gave her away.  Of the air with which old Mr. 
Turveydrop, with his hat under his left arm (the inside presented 
at the clergyman like a cannon) and his eyes creasing themselves up 
into his wig, stood stiff and high-shouldered behind us bridesmaids 
during the ceremony, and afterwards saluted us, I could never say 
enough to do it justice.  Miss Wisk, whom I cannot report as 
prepossessing in appearance, and whose manner was grim, listened to 
the proceedings, as part of woman's wrongs, with a disdainful face.  
Mrs. Jellyby, with her calm smile and her bright eyes, looked the 
least concerned of all the company.

We duly came back to breakfast, and Mrs. Jellyby sat at the head of 
the table and Mr. Jellyby at the foot.  Caddy had previously stolen 
upstairs to hug the children again and tell them that her name was 
Turveydrop.  But this piece of information, instead of being an 
agreeable surprise to Peepy, threw him on his back in such 
transports of kicking grief that I could do nothing on being sent 
for but accede to the proposal that he should be admitted to the 
breakfast table.  So he came down and sat in my lap; and Mrs. 
Jellyby, after saying, in reference to the state of his pinafore, 
"Oh, you naughty Peepy, what a shocking little pig you are!" was 
not at all discomposed.  He was very good except that he brought 
down Noah with him (out of an ark I had given him before we went to 
church) and WOULD dip him head first into the wine-glasses and then 
put him in his mouth.

My guardian, with his sweet temper and his quick perception and his 
amiable face, made something agreeable even out of the ungenial 
company.  None of them seemed able to talk about anything but his, 
or her, own one subject, and none of them seemed able to talk about 
even that as part of a world in which there was anything else; but 
my guardian turned it all to the merry encouragement of Caddy and 
the honour of the occasion, and brought us through the breakfast 
nobly.  What we should have done without him, I am afraid to think, 
for all the company despising the bride and bridegroom and old Mr. 
Turveydrop--and old Mr. Thrveydrop, in virtue of his deportment, 
considering himself vastly superior to all the company--it was a 
very unpromising case.

At last the time came when poor Caddy was to go and when all her 
property was packed on the hired coach and pair that was to take 
her and her husband to Gravesend.  It affected us to see Caddy 
clinging, then, to her deplorable home and hanging on her mother's 
neck with the greatest tenderness.

"I am very sorry I couldn't go on writing from dictation, Ma," 
sobbed Caddy.  "I hope you forgive me now."

"Oh, Caddy, Caddy!" said Mrs. Jellyby.  "I have told you over and 
over again that I have engaged a boy, and there's an end of it."

"You are sure you are not the least angry with me, Ma?  Say you are 
sure before I go away, Ma?"

"You foolish Caddy," returned Mrs. Jellyby, "do I look angry, or 
have I inclination to be angry, or time to be angry?  How CAN you?"

"Take a little care of Pa while I am gone, Mama!"

Mrs. Jellyby positively laughed at the fancy.  "You romantic 
child," said she, lightly patting Caddy's back.  "Go along.  I am 
excellent friends with you.  Now, good-bye, Caddy, and be very 
happy!"

Then Caddy hung upon her father and nursed his cheek against hers 
as if he were some poor dull child in pain.  All this took place in 
the hall.  Her father released her, took out his pocket 
handkerchief, and sat down on the stairs with his head against the 
wall.  I hope he found some consolation in walls.  I almost think 
he did.

And then Prince took her arm in his and turned with great emotion 
and respect to his father, whose deportment at that moment was 
overwhelming.

"Thank you over and over again, father!" said Prince, kissing his 
hand.  "I am very grateful for all your kindness and consideration 
regarding our marriage, and so, I can assure you, is Caddy."

"Very," sobbed Caddy.  "Ve-ry!"

"My dear son," said Mr. Turveydrop, "and dear daughter, I have done 
my duty.  If the spirit of a sainted wooman hovers above us and 
looks down on the occasion, that, and your constant affection, will 
be my recompense.  You will not fail in YOUR duty, my son and 
daughter, I believe?"

"Dear father, never!" cried Prince.

"Never, never, dear Mr. Turveydrop!" said Caddy.

"This," returned Mr. Turveydrop, "is as it should be.  My children, 
my home is yours, my heart is yours, my all is yours.  I will never 
leave you; nothing but death shall part us.  My dear son, you 
contemplate an absence of a week, I think?"

"A week, dear father.  We shall return home this day week."

"My dear child," said Mr. Turveydrop, "let me, even under the 
present exceptional circumstances, recommend strict punctuality.  
It is highly important to keep the connexion together; and schools, 
if at all neglected, are apt to take offence."

"This day week, father, we shall be sure to be home to dinner."

"Good!" said Mr. Turveydrop.  "You will find fires, my dear 
Caroline, in your own room, and dinner prepared in my apartment.  
Yes, yes, Prince!" anticipating some self-denying objection on his 
son's part with a great air.  "You and our Caroline will be strange 
in the upper part of the premises and will, therefore, dine that 
day in my apartment.  Now, bless ye!"

They drove away, and whether I wondered most at Mrs. Jellyby or at 
Mr. Turveydrop, I did not know.  Ada and my guardian were in the 
same condition when we came to talk it over.  But before we drove 
away too, I received a most unexpected and eloquent compliment from 
Mr. Jellyby.  He came up to me in the hall, took both my hands, 
pressed them earnestly, and opened his mouth twice.  I was so sure 
of his meaning that I said, quite flurried, "You are very welcome, 
sir.  Pray don't mention it!"

"I hope this marriage is for the best, guardian," said I when we 
three were on our road home.

"I hope it is, little woman.  Patience.  We shall see."

"Is the wind in the east to-day?" I ventured to ask him.

He laughed heartily and answered, "No."

"But it must have been this morning, I think," said I.

He answered "No" again, and this time my dear girl confidently 
answered "No" too and shook the lovely head which, with its 
blooming flowers against the golden hair, was like the very spring.  
"Much YOU know of east winds, my ugly darling," said I, kissing her 
in my admiration--I couldn't help it.

Well!  It was only their love for me, I know very well, and it is a 
long time ago.  I must write it even if I rub it out again, because 
it gives me so much pleasure.  They said there could be no east 
wind where Somebody was; they said that wherever Dame Durden went, 
there was sunshine and summer air.



CHAPTER XXXI

Nurse and Patient


I had not been at home again many days when one evening I went 
upstairs into my own room to take a peep over Charley's shoulder 
and see how she was getting on with her copy-book.  Writing was a 
trying business to Charley, who seemed to have no natural power 
over a pen, but in whose hand every pen appeared to become 
perversely animated, and to go wrong and crooked, and to stop, and 
splash, and sidle into corners like a saddle-donkey.  It was very 
odd to see what old letters Charley's young hand had made, they so 
wrinkled, and shrivelled, and tottering, it so plump and round.  
Yet Charley was uncommonly expert at other things and had as nimble 
little fingers as I ever watched.

"Well, Charley," said I, looking over a copy of the letter O in 
which it was represented as square, triangular, pear-shaped, and 
collapsed in all kinds of ways, "we are improving.  If we only get 
to make it round, we shall be perfect, Charley."

Then I made one, and Charley made one, and the pen wouldn't join 
Charley's neatly, but twisted it up into a knot.

"Never mind, Charley.  We shall do it in time."

Charley laid down her pen, the copy being finished, opened and shut 
her cramped little hand, looked gravely at the page, half in pride 
and half in doubt, and got up, and dropped me a curtsy.

"Thank you, miss.  If you please, miss, did you know a poor person 
of the name of Jenny?"

"A brickmaker's wife, Charley?  Yes."

"She came and spoke to me when I was out a little while ago, and 
said you knew her, miss.  She asked me if I wasn't the young lady's 
little maid--meaning you for the young lady, miss--and I said yes, 
miss."

"I thought she had left this neighbourhood altogether, Charley."

"So she had, miss, but she's come back again to where she used to 
live--she and Liz.  Did you know another poor person of the name of 
Liz, miss?"

"I think I do, Charley, though not by name."

"That's what she said!" returned Chariey.  "They have both come 
back, miss, and have been tramping high and low."

"Tramping high and low, have they, Charley?"

"Yes, miss."  If Charley could only have made the letters in her 
copy as round as the eyes with which she looked into my face, they 
would have been excellent.  "And this poor person came about the 
house three or four days, hoping to get a glimpse of you, miss--all 
she wanted, she said--but you were away.  That was when she saw me.  
She saw me a-going about, miss," said Charley with a short laugh of 
the greatest delight and pride, "and she thought I looked like your 
maid!"

"Did she though, really, Charley?"

"Yes, miss!" said Charley.  "Really and truly."  And Charley, with 
another short laugh of the purest glee, made her eyes very round 
again and looked as serious as became my maid.  I was never tired 
of seeing Charley in the full enjoyment of that great dignity, 
standing before me with her youthful face and figure, and her 
steady manner, and her childish exultation breaking through it now 
and then in the pleasantest way.

"And where did you see her, Charley?" said I.

My little maid's countenance fell as she replied, "By the doctor's 
shop, miss."  For Charley wore her black frock yet.

I asked if the brickmaker's wife were ill, but Charley said no.  It 
was some one else.  Some one in her cottage who had tramped down to 
Saint Albans and was tramping he didn't know where.  A poor boy, 
Charley said.  No father, no mother, no any one.  "Like as Tom 
might have been, miss, if Emma and me had died after father," said 
Charley, her round eyes filling with tears.

"And she was getting medicine for him, Charley?"

"She said, miss," returned Charley, "how that he had once done as 
much for her."

My little maid's face was so eager and her quiet hands were folded 
so closely in one another as she stood looking at me that I had no 
great difficulty in reading her thoughts.  "Well, Charley," said I, 
"it appears to me that you and I can do no better than go round to 
Jenny's and see what's the matter."

The alacrity with which Charley brought my bonnet and veil, and 
having dressed me, quaintly pinned herself into her warm shawl and 
made herself look like a little old woman, sufficiently expressed 
her readiness.  So Charley and I, without saying anything to any 
one, went out.

It was a cold, wild night, and the trees shuddered in the wind.  
The rain had been thick and heavy all day, and with little 
intermission for many days.  None was falling just then, however.  
The sky had partly cleared, but was very gloomy--even above us, 
where a few stars were shining.  In the north and north-west, where 
the sun had set three hours before, there was a pale dead light 
both beautiful and awful; and into it long sullen lines of cloud 
waved up like a sea stricken immovable as it was heaving.  Towards 
London a lurid glare overhung the whole dark waste, and the 
contrast between these two lights, and the fancy which the redder 
light engendered of an unearthly fire, gleaming on all the unseen 
buildings of the city and on all the faces of its many thousands of 
wondering inhabitants, was as solemn as might be.

I had no thought that night--none, I am quite sure--of what was 
soon to happen to me.  But I have always remembered since that when 
we had stopped at the garden-gate to look up at the sky, and when 
we went upon our way, I had for a moment an undefinable impression 
of myself as being something different from what I then was.  I 
know it was then and there that I had it.  I have ever since 
connected the feeling with that spot and time and with everything 
associated with that spot and time, to the distant voices in the 
town, the barking of a dog, and the sound of wheels coming down the 
miry hill.

It was Saturday night, and most of the people belonging to the 
place where we were going were drinking elsewhere.  We found it 
quieter than I had previously seen it, though quite as miserable.  
The kilns were burning, and a stifling vapour set towards us with a 
pale-blue glare.

We came to the cottage, where there was a feeble candle in the 
patched window.  We tapped at the door and went in.  The mother of 
the little child who had died was sitting in a chair on one side of 
the poor fire by the bed; and opposite to her, a wretched boy, 
supported by the chimney-piece, was cowering on the floor.  He held 
under his arm, like a little bundle, a fragment of a fur cap; and 
as he tried to warm himself, he shook until the crazy door and 
window shook.  The place was closer than before and had an 
unhealthy and a very peculiar smell.

I had not lifted by veil when I first spoke to the woman, which was 
at the moment of our going in.  The boy staggered up instantly and 
stared at me with a remarkable expression of surprise and terror.

His action was so quick and my being the cause of it was so evident 
that I stood still instead of advancing nearer.

"I won't go no more to the berryin ground," muttered the boy; "I 
ain't a-going there, so I tell you!"

I lifted my veil and spoke to the woman.  She said to me in a low 
voice, "Don't mind him, ma'am.  He'll soon come back to his head," 
and said to him, "Jo, Jo, what's the matter?"

"I know wot she's come for!" cried the boy.

"Who?"

"The lady there.  She's come to get me to go along with her to the 
berryin ground.  I won't go to the berryin ground.  I don't like 
the name on it.  She might go a-berryin ME."  His shivering came on 
again, and as he leaned against the wall, he shook the hovel.

"He has been talking off and on about such like all day, ma'am," 
said Jenny softly.  "Why, how you stare!  This is MY lady, Jo."

"Is it?" returned the boy doubtfully, and surveying me with his arm 
held out above his burning eyes.  "She looks to me the t'other one.  
It ain't the bonnet, nor yet it ain't the gownd, but she looks to 
me the t'other one."

My little Charley, with her premature experience of illness and 
trouble, had pulled off her bonnet and shawl and now went quietly 
up to him with a chair and sat him down in it like an old sick 
nurse.  Except that no such attendant could have shown him 
Charley's youthful face, which seemed to engage his confidence.

"I say!" said the boy.  "YOU tell me.  Ain't the lady the t'other 
lady?"

Charley shook her head as she methodically drew his rags about him 
and made him as warm as she could.

"Oh!" the boy muttered.  "Then I s'pose she ain't."

"I came to see if I could do you any good," said I.  "What is the 
matter with you?"

"I'm a-being froze," returned the boy hoarsely, with his haggard 
gaze wandering about me, "and then burnt up, and then froze, and 
then burnt up, ever so many times in a hour.  And my head's all 
sleepy, and all a-going mad-like--and I'm so dry--and my bones 
isn't half so much bones as pain.

"When did he come here?" I asked the woman.

"This morning, ma'am, I found him at the corner of the town.  I had 
known him up in London yonder.  Hadn't I, Jo?"

"Tom-all-Alone's," the boy replied.

Whenever he fixed his attention or his eyes, it was only for a very 
little while.  He soon began to droop his head again, and roll it 
heavily, and speak as if he were half awake.

"When did he come from London?" I asked.

"I come from London yes'day," said the boy himself, now flushed and 
hot.  "I'm a-going somewheres."

"Where is he going?" I asked.

"Somewheres," repeated the boy in a louder tone.  "I have been 
moved on, and moved on, more nor ever I was afore, since the 
t'other one give me the sov'ring.  Mrs. Snagsby, she's always a-
watching, and a-driving of me--what have I done to her?--and 
they're all a-watching and a-driving of me.  Every one of 'em's 
doing of it, from the time when I don't get up, to the time when I 
don't go to bed.  And I'm a-going somewheres.  That's where I'm a-
going.  She told me, down in Tom-all-Alone's, as she came from 
Stolbuns, and so I took the Stolbuns Road.  It's as good as 
another."

He always concluded by addressing Charley.

"What is to be done with him?" said I, taking the woman aside.  "He 
could not travel in this state even if he had a purpose and knew 
where he was going!"

"I know no more, ma'am, than the dead," she replied, glancing 
compassionately at him.  "Perhaps the dead know better, if they 
could only tell us.  I've kept him here all day for pity's sake, 
and I've given him broth and physic, and Liz has gone to try if any 
one will take him in (here's my pretty in the bed--her child, but I 
call it mine); but I can't keep him long, for if my husband was to 
come home and find him here, he'd be rough in putting him out and 
might do him a hurt.  Hark! Here comes Liz back!"

The other woman came hurriedly in as she spoke, and the boy got up 
with a half-obscured sense that he was expected to be going.  When 
the little child awoke, and when and how Charley got at it, took it 
out of bed, and began to walk about hushing it, I don't know.  
There she was, doing all this in a quiet motherly manner as if she 
were living in Mrs. Blinder's attic with Tom and Emma again.

The friend had been here and there, and had been played about from 
hand to hand, and had come back as she went.  At first it was too 
early for the boy to be received into the proper refuge, and at 
last it was too late.  One official sent her to another, and the 
other sent her back again to the first, and so backward and 
forward, until it appeared to me as if both must have been 
appointed for their skill in evading their duties instead of 
performing them.  And now, after all, she said, breathing quickly, 
for she had been running and was frightened too, "Jenny, your 
master's on the road home, and mine's not far behind, and the Lord 
help the boy, for we can do no more for him!"  They put a few 
halfpence together and hurried them into his hand, and so, in an 
oblivious, half-thankful, half-insensible way, he shuffled out of 
the house.

"Give me the child, my dear," said its mother to Charley, "and 
thank you kindly too!  Jenny, woman dear, good night!

Young lady, if my master don't fall out with me, I'll look down by 
the kiln by and by, where the boy will be most like, and again in 
the morning!"  She hurried off, and presenfty we passed her hushing 
and singing to her child at her own door and looking anxiously 
along the road for her drunken husband.

I was afraid of staying then to speak to either woman, lest I 
should bring her into trouble.  But I said to Charley that we must 
not leave the boy to die.  Charley, who knew what to do much better 
than I did, and whose quickness equalled her presence of mind, 
glided on before me, and presently we came up with Jo, just short 
of the brick-kiln.

I think he must have begun his journey with some small bundle under 
his arm and must have had it stolen or lost it.  For he still 
carried his wretched fragment of fur cap like a bundle, though he 
went bareheaded through the rain, which now fell fast.  He stopped 
when we called to him and again showed a dread of me when I came 
up, standing with his lustrous eyes fixed upon me, and even 
arrested in his shivering fit.

I asked him to come with us, and we would take care that he had 
some shelter for the night.

"I don't want no shelter," he said; "I can lay amongst the warm 
bricks."

"But don't you know that people die there?" replied Charley.

"They dies everywheres," said the boy.  "They dies in their 
lodgings--she knows where; I showed her--and they dies down in Tom-
all-Alone's in heaps.  They dies more than they lives, according to 
what I see."  Then he hoarsely whispered Charley, "If she ain't the 
t'other one, she ain't the forrenner.  Is there THREE of 'em then?"

Charley looked at me a little frightened.  I felt half frightened 
at myself when the boy glared on me so.

But he turned and followed when I beckoned to him, and finding that 
he acknowledged that influence in me, I led the way straight home.  
It was not far, only at the summit of the hill.  We passed but one 
man.  I doubted if we should have got home without assistance, the 
boy's steps were so uncertain and tremulous.  He made no complaint, 
however, and was strangely unconcerned about himself, if I may say 
so strange a thing.

Leaving him in the hall for a moment, shrunk into the corner of the 
window-seat and staring with an indifference that scarcely could be 
called wonder at the comfort and brightness about him, I went into 
the drawing-room to speak to my guardian.  There I found Mr. 
Skimpole, who had come down by the coach, as he frequently did 
without notice, and never bringing any clothes with him, but always 
borrowing everything he wanted.

They came out with me directly to look at the boy.  The servants 
had gathered in the hall too, and he shivered in the window-seat 
with Charley standing by him, like some wounded animal that had 
been found in a ditch.

"This is a sorrowful case," said my guardian after asking him a 
question or two and touching him and examining his eyes.  "What do 
you say, Harold?"

"You had better turn him out," said Mr. Skimpole.

"What do you mean?" inquired my guardian, almost sternly.

"My dear Jarndyce," said Mr. Skimpole, "you know what I am: I am a 
child.  Be cross to me if I deserve it.  But I have a 
constitutional objection to this sort of thing.  I always had, when 
I was a medical man.  He's not safe, you know.  There's a very bad 
sort of fever about him."

Mr. Skimpole had retreated from the hall to the drawing-room again 
and said this in his airy way, seated on the music-stool as we 
stood by.

"You'll say it's childish," observed Mr. Skimpole, looking gaily at 
us.  "Well, I dare say it may be; but I AM a child, and I never 
pretend to be anything else.  If you put him out in the road, you 
only put him where he was before.  He will be no worse off than he 
was, you know.  Even make him better off, if you like.  Give him 
sixpence, or five shillings, or five pound ten--you are 
arithmeticians, and I am not--and get rid of him!"

"And what is he to do then?" asked my guardian.

"Upon my life," said Mr. Skimpole, shrugging his shoulders with his 
engaging smile, "I have not the least idea what he is to do then.  
But I have no doubt he'll do it."

"Now, is it not a horrible reflection," said my guardian, to whom I 
had hastily explained the unavailing efforts of the two women, "is 
it not a horrible reflection," walking up and down and rumpling his 
hair, "that if this wretched creature were a convicted prisoner, 
his hospital would be wide open to him, and he would be as well 
taken care of as any sick boy in the kingdom?"

"My dear Jarndyce," returned Mr. Skimpole, "you'll pardon the 
simplicity of the question, coming as it does from a creature who 
is perfectly simple in worldly matters, but why ISN'T he a prisoner 
then?"

My guardian stopped and looked at him with a whimsical mixture of 
amusement and indignation in his face.

"Our young friend is not to be suspected of any delicacy, I should 
imagine," said Mr. Skimpole, unabashed and candid.  "It seems to me 
that it would be wiser, as well as in a certain kind of way more 
respectable, if he showed some misdirected energy that got him into 
prison.  There would be more of an adventurous spirit in it, and 
consequently more of a certain sort of poetry."

"I believe," returned my guardian, resuming his uneasy walk, "that 
there is not such another child on earth as yourself."

"Do you really?" said Mr. Skimpole.  "I dare say!  But I confess I 
don't see why our young friend, in his degree, should not seek to 
invest himself with such poetry as is open to him.  He is no doubt 
born with an appetite--probably, when he is in a safer state of 
health, he has an excellent appetite.  Very well.  At our young 
friend's natural dinner hour, most likely about noon, our young 
friend says in effect to society, 'I am hungry; will you have the 
goodness to produce your spoon and feed me?'  Society, which has 
taken upon itself the general arrangement of the whole system of 
spoons and professes to have a spoon for our young friend, does NOT 
produce that spoon; and our young friend, therefore, says 'You 
really must excuse me if I seize it.'  Now, this appears to me a 
case of misdirected energy, which has a certain amount of reason in 
it and a certain amount of romance; and I don't know but what I 
should be more interested in our young friend, as an illustration 
of such a case, than merely as a poor vagabond--which any one can 
be."

"In the meantime," I ventured to observe, "he is getting worse."

"In the meantime," said Mr. Skimpole cheerfully, "as Miss 
Summerson, with her practical good sense, observes, he is getting 
worse.  Therefore I recommend your turning him out before he gets 
still worse."

The amiable face with which he said it, I think I shall never 
forget.

"Of course, little woman," observed my guardian, tuming to me, "I 
can ensure his admission into the proper place by merely going 
there to enforce it, though it's a bad state of things when, in his 
condition, that is necessary.  But it's growing late, and is a very 
bad night, and the boy is worn out already.  There is a bed in the 
wholesome loft-room by the stable; we had better keep him there 
till morning, when he can be wrapped up and removed.  We'll do 
that."

"Oh!" said Mr. Skimpole, with his hands upon the keys of the piano 
as we moved away.  "Are you going back to our young friend?"

"Yes," said my guardian.

"How I envy you your constitution, Jarndyce!" returned Mr. Skimpole 
with playful admiration.  "You don't mind these things; neither 
does Miss Summerson.  You are ready at all times to go anywhere, 
and do anything.  Such is will!  I have no will at all--and no 
won't--simply can't."

"You can't recommend anything for the boy, I suppose?" said my 
guardian, looking back over his shoulder half angrily; only half 
angrily, for he never seemed to consider Mr. Skimpole an 
accountable being.

"My dear Jarndyce, I observed a bottle of cooling medicine in his 
pocket, and it's impossible for him to do better than take it.  You 
can tell them to sprinkle a little vinegar about the place where he 
sleeps and to keep it moderately cool and him moderately warm.  But 
it is mere impertinence in me to offer any recommendation.  Miss 
Summerson has such a knowledge of detail and such a capacity for 
the administration of detail that she knows all about it."

We went back into the hall and explained to Jo what we proposed to 
do, which Charley explained to him again and which he received with 
the languid unconcern I had already noticed, wearily looking on at 
what was done as if it were for somebody else.  The servants 
compassionating his miserable state and being very anxious to help, 
we soon got the loft-room ready; and some of the men about the 
house carried him across the wet yard, well wrapped up.  It was 
pleasant to observe how kind they were to him and how there 
appeared to be a general impression among them that frequently 
calling him "Old Chap" was likely to revive his spirits.  Charley 
directed the operations and went to and fro between the loft-room 
and the house with such little stimulants and comforts as we 
thought it safe to give him.  My guardian himself saw him before he 
was left for the night and reported to me when he returned to the 
growlery to write a letter on the boy's behalf, which a messenger 
was charged to deliver at day-light in the morning, that he seemed 
easier and inclined to sleep.  They had fastened his door on the 
outside, he said, in case of his being delirious, but had so 
arranged that he could not make any noise without being heard.

Ada being in our room with a cold, Mr. Skimpole was left alone all 
this time and entertained himself by playing snatches of pathetic 
airs and sometimes singing to them (as we heard at a distance) with 
great expression and feeling.  When we rejoined him in the drawing-
room he said he would give us a little ballad which had come into 
his head "apropos of our young friend," and he sang one about a 
peasant boy,


   "Thrown on the wide world, doomed to wander and roam,
    Bereft of his parents, bereft of a home."


quite exquisitely.  It was a song that always made him cry, he told 
us.

He was extremely gay all the rest of the evening, for he absolutely 
chirped--those were his delighted words--when he thought by what a 
happy talent for business he was surrounded.  He gave us, in his 
glass of negus, "Better health to our young friend!" and supposed 
and gaily pursued the case of his being reserved like Whittington 
to become Lord Mayor of London.  In that event, no doubt, he would 
establish the Jarndyce Institution and the Summerson Almshouses, 
and a little annual Corporation Pilgrimage to St. Albans.  He had 
no doubt, he said, that our young friend was an excellent boy in 
his way, but his way was not the Harold Skimpole way; what Harold 
Skimpole was, Harold Skimpole had found himself, to his 
considerable surprise, when he first made his own acquaintance; he 
had accepted himself with all his failings and had thought it sound 
philosophy to make the best of the bargain; and he hoped we would 
do the same.

Charley's last report was that the boy was quiet.  I could see, 
from my window, the lantern they had left him burning quietly; and 
I went to bed very happy to think that he was sheltered.

There was more movement and more talking than usual a little before 
daybreak, and it awoke me.  As I was dressing, I looked out of my 
window and asked one of our men who had been among the active 
sympathizers last night whether there was anything wrong about the 
house.  The lantern was still burning in the loft-window.

"It's the boy, miss," said he.

"Is he worse?" I inquired.

"Gone, miss.

"Dead!"

"Dead, miss?  No.  Gone clean off."

At what time of the night he had gone, or how, or why, it seemed 
hopeless ever to divine.  The door remaining as it had been left, 
and the lantern standing in the window, it could only be supposed 
that he had got out by a trap in the floor which communicated with 
an empty cart-house below.  But he had shut it down again, if that 
were so; and it looked as if it had not been raised.  Nothing of 
any kind was missing.  On this fact being clearly ascertained, we 
all yielded to the painful belief that delirium had come upon him 
in the night and that, allured by some imaginary object or pursued 
by some imaginary horror, he had strayed away in that worse than 
helpless state; all of us, that is to say, but Mr. Skimpole, who 
repeatedly suggested, in his usual easy light style, that it had 
occurred to our young friend that he was not a safe inmate, having 
a bad kind of fever upon him, and that he had with great natural 
politeness taken himself off.

Every possible inquiry was made, and every place was searched.  The 
brick-kilns were examined, the cottages were visited, the two women 
were particularly questioned, but they knew nothing of him, and 
nobody could doubt that their wonder was genuine.  The weather had 
for some time been too wet and the night itself had been too wet to 
admit of any tracing by footsteps.  Hedge and ditch, and wall, and 
rick and stack, were examined by our men for a long distance round, 
lest the boy should be lying in such a place insensible or dead; 
but nothing was seen to indicate that he had ever been near.  From 
the time when he was left in the loft-room, he vanished.

The search continued for five days.  I do not mean that it ceased 
even then, but that my attention was then diverted into a current 
very memorable to me.

As Charley was at her writing again in my room in the evening, and 
as I sat opposite to her at work, I felt the table tremble.  
Looking up, I saw my little maid shivering from head to foot.

"Charley," said I, "are you so cold?"

"I think I am, miss," she replied.  "I don't know what it is.  I 
can't hold myself still.  I felt so yesterday at about this same 
time, miss.  Don't be uneasy, I think I'm ill."

I heard Ada's voice outside, and I hurried to the door of 
communication between my room and our pretty sitting-room, and 
locked it.  Just in time, for she tapped at it while my hand was 
yet upon the key.

Ada called to me to let her in, but I said, "Not now, my dearest.  
Go away.  There's nothing the matter; I will come to you 
presently."  Ah! It was a long, long time before my darling girl 
and I were companions again.

Charley fell ill.  In twelve hours she was very ill.  I moved her 
to my room, and laid her in my bed, and sat down quietly to nurse 
her.  I told my guardian all about it, and why I felt it was 
necessary that I should seclude myself, and my reason for not 
seeing my darling above all.  At first she came very often to the 
door, and called to me, and even reproached me with sobs and tears; 
but I wrote her a long letter saying that she made me anxious and 
unhappy and imploring her, as she loved me and wished my mind to be 
at peace, to come no nearer than the garden.  After that she came 
beneath the window even oftener than she had come to the door, and 
if I had learnt to love her dear sweet voice before when we were 
hardly ever apart, how did I learn to love it then, when I stood 
behind the window-curtain listening and replying, but not so much 
as looking out!  How did I learn to love it afterwards, when the 
harder time came!

They put a bed for me in our sitting-room; and by keeping the door 
wide open, I turned the two rooms into one, now that Ada had 
vacated that part of the house, and kept them always fresh and 
airy.  There was not a servant in or about the house but was so 
good that they would all most gladly have come to me at any hour of 
the day or night without the least fear or unwillingness, but I 
thought it best to choose one worthy woman who was never to see Ada 
and whom I could trust to come and go with all precaution.  Through 
her means I got out to take the air with my guardian when there was 
no fear of meeting Ada, and wanted for nothing in the way of 
attendance, any more than in any other respect.

And thus poor Charley sickened and grew worse, and fell into heavy 
danger of death, and lay severely ill for many a long round of day 
and night.  So patient she was, so uncomplaining, and inspired by 
such a gentle fortitude that very often as I sat by Charley holding 
her head in my arms--repose would come to her, so, when it would 
come to her in no other attitude--I silently prayed to our Father 
in heaven that I might not forget the lesson which this little 
sister taught me.

I was very sorrowful to think that Charley's pretty looks would 
change and be disfigured, even if she recovered--she was such a 
child with her dimpled face--but that thought was, for the greater 
part, lost in her greater peril.  When she was at the worst, and 
her mind rambled again to the cares of her father's sick bed and 
the little children, she still knew me so far as that she would be 
quiet in my arms when she could lie quiet nowhere else, and murmur 
out the wanderings of her mind less restlessly.  At those times I 
used to think, how should I ever tell the two remaining babies that 
the baby who had learned of her faithful heart to be a mother to 
them in their need was dead!

There were other times when Charley knew me well and talked to me, 
telling me that she sent her love to Tom and Emma and that she was 
sure Tom would grow up to be a good man.  At those times Charley 
would speak to me of what she had read to her father as well as she 
could to comfort him, of that young man carried out to be buried 
who was the only son of his mother and she was a widow, of the 
ruler's daughter raised up by the gracious hand upon her bed of 
death.  And Charley told me that when her father died she had 
kneeled down and prayed in her first sorrow that he likewise might 
be raised up and given back to his poor children, and that if she 
should never get better and should die too, she thought it likely 
that it might come into Tom's mind to offer the same prayer for 
her.  Then would I show Tom how these people of old days had been 
brought back to life on earth, only that we might know our hope to 
be restored to heaven!

But of all the various times there were in Charley's illness, there 
was not one when she lost the gentle qualities I have spoken of.  
And there were many, many when I thought in the night of the last 
high belief in the watching angel, and the last higher trust in 
God, on the part of her poor despised father.

And Charley did not die.  She flutteringiy and slowly turned the 
dangerous point, after long lingering there, and then began to 
mend.  The hope that never had been given, from the first, of 
Charley being in outward appearance Charley any more soon began to 
be encouraged; and even that prospered, and I saw her growing into 
her old childish likeness again.

It was a great morning when I could tell Ada all this as she stood 
out in the garden; and it was a great evening when Charley and I at 
last took tea together in the next room.  But on that same evening, 
I felt that I was stricken cold.

Happily for both of us, it was not until Charley was safe in bed 
again and placidly asleep that I began to think the contagion of 
her illness was upon me.  I had been able easily to hide what I 
felt at tea-time, but I was past that already now, and I knew that 
I was rapidly following in Charley's steps.

I was well enough, however, to be up early in the morning, and to 
return my darling's cheerful blessing from the garden, and to talk 
with her as long as usual.  But I was not free from an impression 
that I had been walking about the two rooms in the night, a little 
beside myself, though knowing where I was; and I felt confused at 
times--with a curious sense of fullness, as if I were becoming too 
large altogether.

In the evening I was so much worse that I resolved to prepare 
Charley, with which view I said, "You're getting quite strong, 
Charley, are you not?'

"Oh, quite!" said Charley.

"Strong enough to be told a secret, I think, Charley?"

"Quite strong enough for that, miss!" cried Charley.  But Charley's 
face fell in the height of her delight, for she saw the secret in 
MY face; and she came out of the great chair, and fell upon my 
bosom, and said "Oh, miss, it's my doing!  It's my doing!" and a 
great deal more out of the fullness of her grateful heart.

"Now, Charley," said I after letting her go on for a little while, 
"if I am to be ill, my great trust, humanly speaking, is in you.  
And unless you are as quiet and composed for me as you always were 
for yourself, you can never fulfil it, Charley."

"If you'll let me cry a little longer, miss," said Charley.  "Oh, 
my dear, my dear!  If you'll only let me cry a little longer.  Oh, 
my dear!"--how affectionately and devotedly she poured this out as 
she clung to my neck, I never can remember without tears--"I'll be 
good."

So I let Charley cry a little longer, and it did us both good.

"Trust in me now, if you please, miss," said Charley quietly.  "I 
am listening to everything you say."

"It's very little at present, Charley.  I shall tell your doctor 
to-night that I don't think I am well and that you are going to 
nurse me."

For that the poor child thanked me with her whole heart.  "And in 
the morning, when you hear Miss Ada in the garden, if I should not 
be quite able to go to the window-curtain as usual, do you go, 
Charley, and say I am asleep--that I have rather tired myself, and 
am asleep.  At all times keep the room as I have kept it, Charley, 
and let no one come."

Charley promised, and I lay down, for I was very heavy.  I saw the 
doctor that night and asked the favour of him that I wished to ask 
relative to his saying nothing of my illness in the house as yet.  
I have a very indistinct remembrance of that night melting into 
day, and of day melting into night again; but I was just able on 
the first morning to get to the window and speak to my darling.

On the second morning I heard her dear voice--Oh, how dear now!--
outside; and I asked Charley, with some difficulty (speech being 
painful to me), to go and say I was asleep.  I heard her answer 
softly, "Don't disturb her, Charley, for the world!"

"How does my own Pride look, Charley?" I inquired.

"Disappointed, miss," said Charley, peeping through the curtain.

"But I know she is very beautiful this morning."

"She is indeed, miss," answered Charley, peeping.  "Still looking 
up at the window."

With her blue clear eyes, God bless them, always loveliest when 
raised like that!

I called Charley to me and gave her her last charge.

"Now, Charley, when she knows I am ill, she will try to make her 
way into the room.  Keep her out, Charley, if you love me truly, to 
the last!  Charley, if you let her in but once, only to look upon 
me for one moment as I lie here, I shall die."

"I never will!  I never will!" she promised me.

"I believe it, my dear Charley.  And now come and sit beside me for 
a little while, and touch me with your hand.  For I cannot see you, 
Charley; I am blind."



CHAPTER XXXII

The Appointed Time


It is night in Lincoln's Inn--perplexed and troublous valley of the 
shadow of the law, where suitors generally find but little day--and 
fat candles are snuffed out in offices, and clerks have rattled 
down the crazy wooden stairs and dispersed.  The bell that rings at 
nine o'clock has ceased its doleful clangour about nothing; the 
gates are shut; and the night-porter, a solemn warder with a mighty 
power of sleep, keeps guard in his lodge.  From tiers of staircase 
windows clogged lamps like the eyes of Equity, bleared Argus with a 
fathomless pocket for every eye and an eye upon it, dimly blink at 
the stars.  In dirty upper casements, here and there, hazy little 
patches of candlelight reveal where some wise draughtsman and 
conveyancer yet toils for the entanglement of real estate in meshes 
of sheep-skin, in the average ratio of about a dozen of sheep to an 
acre of land.  Over which bee-like industry these benefactors of 
their species linger yet, though office-hours be past, that they 
may give, for every day, some good account at last.

In the neighbouring court, where the Lord Chancellor of the rag and 
bottle shop dwells, there is a general tendency towards beer and 
supper.  Mrs. Piper and Mrs. Perkins, whose respective sons, 
engaged with a circle of acquaintance in the game of hide and seek, 
have been lying in ambush about the by-ways of Chancery Lane for 
some hours and scouring the plain of the same thoroughfare to the 
confusion of passengers--Mrs. Piper and Mrs. Perkins have but now 
exchanged congratulations on the children being abed, and they 
still linger on a door-step over a few parting words.  Mr. Krook 
and his lodger, and the fact of Mr. Krook's being "continually in 
liquor," and the testamentary prospects of the young man are, as 
usual, the staple of their conversation.  But they have something 
to say, likewise, of the Harmonic Meeting at the Sol's Arms, where 
the sound of the piano through the partly opened windows jingles 
out into the court, and where Little Swills, after keeping the 
lovers of harmony in a roar like a very Yorick, may now be heard 
taking the gruff line in a concerted piece and sentimentally 
adjuring his friends and patrons to "Listen, listen, listen, tew 
the wa-ter fall!"  Mrs. Perkins and Mrs. Piper compare opinions on 
the subject of the young lady of professional celebrity who assists 
at the Harmonic Meetings and who has a space to herself in the 
manuscript announcement in the window, Mrs. Perkins possessing 
information that she has been married a year and a half, though 
announced as Miss M. Melvilleson, the noted siren, and that her 
baby is clandestinely conveyed to the Sol's Arms every night to 
receive its natural nourishment during the entertainments.  "Sooner 
than which, myself," says Mrs. Perkins, "I would get my living by 
selling lucifers."  Mrs. Piper, as in duty bound, is of the same 
opinion, holding that a private station is better than public 
applause, and thanking heaven for her own (and, by implication, 
Mrs. Perkins') respectability.  By this time the pot-boy of the 
Sol's Arms appearing with her supper-pint well frothed, Mrs. Piper 
accepts that tankard and retires indoors, first giving a fair good 
night to Mrs. Perkins, who has had her own pint in her hand ever 
since it was fetched from the same hostelry by young Perkins before 
he was sent to bed.  Now there is a sound of putting up shop-
shutters in the court and a smell as of the smoking of pipes; and 
shooting stars are seen in upper windows, further indicating 
retirement to rest.  Now, too, the policeman begins to push at 
doors; to try fastenings; to be suspicious of bundles; and to 
administer his beat, on the hypothesis that every one is either 
robbing or being robbed.

It is a close night, though the damp cold is searching too, and 
there is a laggard mist a little way up in the air.  It is a fine 
steaming night to turn the slaughter-houses, the unwholesome 
trades, the sewerage, bad water, and burial-grounds to account, and 
give the registrar of deaths some extra business.  It may be 
something in the air--there is plenty in it--or it may be something 
in himself that is in fault; but Mr. Weevle, otherwise Jobling, is 
very ill at ease.  He comes and goes between his own room and the 
open street door twenty times an hour.  He has been doing so ever 
since it fell dark.  Since the Chancellor shut up his shop, which 
he did very early to-night, Mr. Weevle has been down and up, and 
down and up (with a cheap tight velvet skull-cap on his head, 
making his whiskers look out of all proportion), oftener than 
before.

It is no phenomenon that Mr. Snagsby should be ill at ease too, for 
he always is so, more or less, under the oppressive influence of 
the secret that is upon him.  Impelled by the mystery of which he 
is a partaker and yet in which he is not a sharer, Mr. Snagsby 
haunts what seems to be its fountain-head--the rag and bottle shop 
in the court.  It has an irresistible attraction for him.  Even 
now, coming round by the Sol's Arms with the intention of passing 
down the court, and out at the Chancery Lane end, and so 
terminating his unpremeditated after-supper stroll of ten minutes' 
long from his own door and back again, Mr. Snagsby approaches.

"What, Mr. Weevle?" says the stationer, stopping to speak.  "Are 
YOU there?"

"Aye!" says Weevle, "Here I am, Mr. Snagsby."

"Airing yourself, as I am doing, before you go to bed?" the 
stationer inquires.

"Why, there's not much air to be got here; and what there is, is 
not very freshening," Weevle answers, glancing up and down the 
court.

"Very true, sir.  Don't you observe," says Mr. Snagsby, pausing to 
sniff and taste the air a little, "don't you observe, Mr. Weevle, 
that you're--not to put too fine a point upon it--that you're 
rather greasy here, sir?"

"Why, I have noticed myself that there is a queer kind of flavour 
in the place to-night," Mr. Weevle rejoins.  "I suppose it's chops 
at the Sol's Arms."

"Chops, do you think?  Oh! Chops, eh?"  Mr. Snagsby sniffs and 
tastes again.  "Well, sir, I suppose it is.  But I should say their 
cook at the Sol wanted a little looking after.  She has been 
burning 'em, sir!  And I don't think"--Mr. Snagsby sniffs and 
tastes again and then spits and wipes his mouth--"I don't think--
not to put too fine a point upon it--that they were quite fresh 
when they were shown the gridiron."

"That's very likely.  It's a tainting sort of weather."

"It IS a tainting sort of weather," says Mr. Snagsby, "and I find 
it sinking to the spirits."

"By George!  I find it gives me the horrors," returns Mr. Weevle.

"Then, you see, you live in a lonesome way, and in a lonesome room, 
with a black circumstance hanging over it," says Mr. Snagsby, 
looking in past the other's shoulder along the dark passage and 
then falling back a step to look up at the house.  "I couldn't live 
in that room alone, as you do, sir.  I should get so fidgety and 
worried of an evening, sometimes, that I should be driven to come 
to the door and stand here sooner than sit there.  But then it's 
very true that you didn't see, in your room, what I saw there.  
That makes a difference."

"I know quite enough about it," returns Tony.

"It's not agreeable, is it?" pursues Mr. Snagsby, coughing his 
cough of mild persuasion behind his hand.  "Mr. Krook ought to 
consider it in the rent.  I hope he does, I am sure."

"I hope he does," says Tony.  "But I doubt it."

"You find the rent too high, do you, sir?" returns the stationer.  
"Rents ARE high about here.  I don't know how it is exactly, but 
the law seems to put things up in price.  Not," adds Mr. Snagsby 
with his apologetic cough, "that I mean to say a word against the 
profession I get my living by."

Mr. Weevle again glances up and down the court and then looks at 
the stationer.  Mr. Snagsby, blankly catching his eye, looks upward 
for a star or so and coughs a cough expressive of not exactly 
seeing his way out of this conversation.

"It's a curious fact, sir," he observes, slowly rubbing his hands, 
"that he should have been--"

"Who's he?" interrupts Mr. Weevle.

"The deceased, you know," says Mr. Snagsby, twitching his head and 
right eyebrow towards the staircase and tapping his acquaintance on 
the button.

"Ah, to be sure!" returns the other as if he were not over-fond of 
the subject.  "I thought we had done with him."

"I was only going to say it's a curious fact, sir, that he should 
have come and lived here, and been one of my writers, and then that 
you should come and live here, and be one of my writers too.  Which 
there is nothing derogatory, but far from it in the appellation," 
says Mr. Snagsby, breaking off with a mistrust that he may have 
unpolitely asserted a kind of proprietorship in Mr. Weevle, 
"because I have known writers that have gone into brewers' houses 
and done really very respectable indeed.  Eminently respectable, 
sir," adds Mr. Snagsby with a misgiving that he has not improved 
the matter.

"It's a curious coincidence, as you say," answers Weevle, once more 
glancing up and down the court.

"Seems a fate in it, don't there?" suggests the stationer.

"There does."

"Just so," observes the stationer with his confirmatory cough.  
"Quite a fate in it.  Quite a fate.  Well, Mr. Weevle, I am afraid 
I must bid you good night"--Mr. Snagsby speaks as if it made him 
desolate to go, though he has been casting about for any means of 
escape ever since he stopped to speak--"my little woman will be 
looking for me else.  Good night, sir!"

If Mr. Snagsby hastens home to save his little woman the trouble of 
looking for him, he might set his mind at rest on that score.  His 
little woman has had her eye upon him round the Sol's Arms all this 
time and now glides after him with a pocket handkerchief wrapped 
over her head, honourmg Mr. Weevle and his doorway with a searching 
glance as she goes past.

"You'll know me again, ma'am, at all events," says Mr. Weevle to 
himself; "and I can't compliment you on your appearance, whoever 
you are, with your head tied up in a bundle.  Is this fellow NEVER 
coming!"

This fellow approaches as he speaks.  Mr. Weevle softly holds up 
his finger, and draws him into the passage, and closes the street 
door.  Then they go upstairs, Mr. Weevle heavily, and Mr. Guppy 
(for it is he) very lightly indeed.  When they are shut into the 
back room, they speak low.

"I thought you had gone to Jericho at least instead of coming 
here," says Tony.

"Why, I said about ten."

"You said about ten," Tony repeats.  "Yes, so you did say about 
ten.  But according to my count, it's ten times ten--it's a hundred 
o'clock.  I never had such a night in my life!"

"What has been the matter?"

"That's it!" says Tony.  "Nothing has been the matter.  But here 
have I been stewing and fuming in this jolly old crib till I have 
had the horrors falling on me as thick as hail.  THERE'S a blessed-
looking candle!" says Tony, pointing to the heavily burning taper 
on his table with a great cabbage head and a long winding-sheet.

"That's easily improved," Mr. Guppy observes as he takes the 
snuffers in hand.

"IS it?" returns his friend.  "Not so easily as you think.  It has 
been smouldering like that ever since it was lighted."

"Why, what's the matter with you, Tony?" inquires Mr. Guppy, 
looking at him, snuffers in hand, as he sits down with his elbow on 
the table.

"William Guppy," replies the other, "I am in the downs.  It's this 
unbearably dull, suicidal room--and old Boguey downstairs, I 
suppose."  Mr. Weevle moodily pushes the snuffers-tray from him 
with his elbow, leans his head on his hand, puts his feet on the 
fender, and looks at the fire.  Mr. Guppy, observing him, slightly 
tosses his head and sits down on the other side of the table in an 
easy attitude.

"Wasn't that Snagsby talking to you, Tony?"

"Yes, and he--yes, it was Snagsby," said Mr. Weevle, altering the 
construction of his sentence.

"On business?"

"No.  No business.  He was only sauntering by and stopped to 
prose."

"I thought it was Snagsby," says Mr. Guppy, "and thought it as well 
that he shouldn't see me, so I waited till he was gone."

"There we go again, William G.!" cried Tony, looking up for an 
instant.  "So mysterious and secret!  By George, if we were going 
to commit a murder, we couldn't have more mystery about it!"

Mr. Guppy affects to smile, and with the view of changing the 
conversation, looks with an admiration, real or pretended, round 
the room at the Galaxy Gallery of British Beauty, terminating his 
survey with the portrait of Lady Dedlock over the mantelshelf, in 
which she is represented on a terrace, with a pedestal upon the 
terrace, and a vase upon the pedestal, and her shawl upon the vase, 
and a prodigious piece of fur upon the shawl, and her arm on the 
prodigious piece of fur, and a bracelet on her arm.

"That's very like Lady Dedlock," says Mr. Guppy.  "It's a speaking 
likeness."

"I wish it was," growls Tony, without changing his position.  "I 
should have some fashionable conversation, here, then."

Finding by this time that his friend is not to be wheedled into a 
more sociable humour, Mr. Guppy puts about upon the ill-used tack 
and remonstrates with him.

"Tony," says he, "I can make allowances for lowness of spirits, for 
no man knows what it is when it does come upon a man better than I 
do, and no man perhaps has a better right to know it than a man who 
has an unrequited image imprinted on his 'eart.  But there are 
bounds to these things when an unoffending party is in question, 
and I will acknowledge to you, Tony, that I don't think your manner 
on the present occasion is hospitable or quite gentlemanly."

"This is strong language, William Guppy," returns Mr. Weevle.

"Sir, it may be," retorts Mr. William Guppy, "but I feel strongly 
when I use it."

Mr. Weevle admits that he has been wrong and begs Mr. William Guppy 
to think no more about it.  Mr. William Guppy, however, having got 
the advantage, cannot quite release it without a little more 
injured remonstrance.

"No!  Dash it, Tony," says that gentleman, "you really ought to be 
careful how you wound the feelings of a man who has an unrequited 
image imprinted on his 'eart and who is NOT altogether happy in 
those chords which vibrate to the tenderest emotions.  You, Tony, 
possess in yourself all that is calculated to charm the eye and 
allure the taste.  It is not--happily for you, perhaps, and I may 
wish that I could say the same--it is not your character to hover 
around one flower.  The ole garden is open to you, and your airy 
pinions carry you through it.  Still, Tony, far be it from me, I am 
sure, to wound even your feelings without a cause!"

Tony again entreats that the subject may be no longer pursued, 
saying emphatically, "William Guppy, drop it!"  Mr. Guppy 
acquiesces, with the reply, "I never should have taken it up, Tony, 
of my own accord."

"And now," says Tony, stirring the fire, "touching this same bundle 
of letters.  Isn't it an extraordinary thing of Krook to have 
appointed twelve o'clock to-night to hand 'em over to me?"

"Very.  What did he do it for?"

"What does he do anything for?  HE don't know.  Said to-day was his 
birthday and he'd hand 'em over to-night at twelve o'clock.  He'll 
have drunk himself blind by that time.  He has been at it all day."

"He hasn't forgotten the appointment, I hope?"

"Forgotten?  Trust him for that.  He never forgets anything.  I saw 
him to-night, about eight--helped him to shut up his shop--and he 
had got the letters then in his hairy cap.  He pulled it off and 
showed 'em me.  When the shop was closed, he took them out of his 
cap, hung his cap on the chair-back, and stood turning them over 
before the fire.  I heard him a little while afterwards, through 
the floor here, humming like the wind, the only song he knows--
about Bibo, and old Charon, and Bibo being drunk when he died, or 
something or other.  He has been as quiet since as an old rat 
asleep in his hole."

"And you are to go down at twelve?"

"At twelve.  And as I tell you, when you came it seemed to me a 
hundred."

"Tony," says Mr. Guppy after considering a little with his legs 
crossed, "he can't read yet, can he?"

"Read!  He'll never read.  He can make all the letters separately, 
and he knows most of them separately when he sees them; he has got 
on that much, under me; but he can't put them together.  He's too 
old to acquire the knack of it now--and too drunk."

"Tony," says Mr. Guppy, uncrossing and recrossing his legs, "how do 
you suppose he spelt out that name of Hawdon?"

"He never spelt it out.  You know what a curious power of eye he 
has and how he has been used to employ himself in copying things by 
eye alone.  He imitated it, evidently from the direction of a 
letter, and asked me what it meant."

"Tony," says Mr. Guppy, uncrossing and recrossing his legs again, 
"should you say that the original was a man's writing or a 
woman's?"

"A woman's.  Fifty to one a lady's--slopes a good deal, and the end 
of the letter 'n,' long and hasty."

Mr. Guppy has been biting his thumb-nail during this dialogue, 
generally changing the thumb when he has changed the cross leg.  As 
he is going to do so again, he happens to look at his coat-sleeve.  
It takes his attention.  He stares at it, aghast.

"Why, Tony, what on earth is going on in this house to-night?  Is 
there a chimney on fire?"

"Chimney on fire!"

"Ah!" returns Mr. Guppy.  "See how the soot's falling.  See here, 
on my arm!  See again, on the table here!  Confound the stuff, it 
won't blow off--smears like black fat!"

They look at one another, and Tony goes listening to the door, and 
a little way upstairs, and a little way downstairs.  Comes back and 
says it's all right and all quiet, and quotes the remark he lately 
made to Mr. Snagsby about their cooking chops at the Sol's Arms.

"And it was then," resumes Mr. Guppy, still glancing with 
remarkable aversion at the coat-sleeve, as they pursue their 
conversation before the fire, leaning on opposite sides of the 
table, with their heads very near together, "that he told you of 
his having taken the bundle of letters from his lodger's 
portmanteau?"

"That was the time, sir," answers Tony, faintly adjusting his 
whiskers.  "Whereupon I wrote a line to my dear boy, the Honourable 
William Guppy, informing him of the appointment for to-night and 
advising him not to call before, Boguey being a slyboots."

The light vivacious tone of fashionable life which is usually 
assumed by Mr. Weevle sits so ill upon him to-night that he 
abandons that and his whiskers together, and after looking over his 
shoulder, appears to yield himself up a prey to the horrors again.

"You are to bring the letters to your room to read and compare, and 
to get yourself into a position to tell him all about them.  That's 
the arrangement, isn't it, Tony?" asks Mr. Guppy, anxiously biting 
his thumb-nail.

"You can't speak too low.  Yes.  That's what he and I agreed."

"I tell you what, Tony--"

"You can't speak too low," says Tony once more.  Mr. Guppy nods his 
sagacious head, advances it yet closer, and drops into a whisper.

"I tell you what.  The first thing to be done is to make another 
packet like the real one so that if he should ask to see the real 
one while it's in my possession, you can show him the dummy."

"And suppose he detects the dummy as soon as he sees it, which with 
his biting screw of an eye is about five hundred times more likely 
than not," suggests Tony.

"Then we'll face it out.  They don't belong to him, and they never 
did.  You found that, and you placed them in my hands--a legal 
friend of yours--for security.  If he forces us to it, they'll be 
producible, won't they?"

"Ye-es," is Mr. Weevle's reluctant admission.

"Why, Tony," remonstrates his friend, "how you look!  You don't 
doubt William Guppy?  You don't suspect any harm?"

"I don't suspect anything more than I know, William," returns the 
other gravely.

"And what do you know?" urges Mr. Guppy, raising his voice a 
little; but on his friend's once more warning him, "I tell you, you 
can't speak too low," he repeats his question without any sound at 
all, forming with his lips only the words, "What do you know?"

"I know three things.  First, I know that here we are whispering in 
secrecy, a pair of conspirators."

"Well!" says Mr. Guppy.  "And we had better be that than a pair of 
noodles, which we should be if we were doing anything else, for 
it's the only way of doing what we want to do.  Secondly?"

"Secondly, it's not made out to me how it's likely to be 
profitable, after all."

Mr. Guppy casts up his eyes at the portrait of Lady Dedlock over 
the mantelshelf and replies, "Tony, you are asked to leave that to 
the honour of your friend.  Besides its being calculated to serve 
that friend in those chords of the human mind which--which need not 
be called into agonizing vibration on the present occasion--your 
friend is no fool.  What's that?"

"It's eleven o'clock striking by the bell of Saint Paul's.  Listen 
and you'll hear all the bells in the city jangling."

Both sit silent, listening to the metal voices, near and distant, 
resounding from towers of various heights, in tones more various 
than their situations.  When these at length cease, all seems more 
mysterious and quiet than before.  One disagreeable result of 
whispering is that it seems to evoke an atmosphere of silence, 
haunted by the ghosts of sound--strange cracks and tickings, the 
rustling of garments that have no substance in them, and the tread 
of dreadful feet that would leave no mark on the sea-sand or the 
winter snow.  So sensitive the two friends happen to be that the 
air is full of these phantoms, and the two look over their 
shoulders by one consent to see that the door is shut.

"Yes, Tony?" says Mr. Guppy, drawing nearer to the fire and biting 
his unsteady thumb-nail.  "You were going to say, thirdly?"

"It's far from a pleasant thing to be plotting about a dead man in 
the room where he died, especially when you happen to live in it."

"But we are plotting nothing against him, Tony."

"May be not, still I don't like it.  Live here by yourself and see 
how YOU like it."

"As to dead men, Tony," proceeds Mr. Guppy, evading this proposal, 
"there have been dead men in most rooms."

"I know there have, but in most rooms you let them alone, and--and 
they let you alone," Tony answers.

The two look at each other again.  Mr. Guppy makes a hurried remark 
to the effect that they may be doing the deceased a service, that 
he hopes so.  There is an oppressive blank until Mr. Weevle, by 
stirring the fire suddenly, makes Mr. Guppy start as if his heart 
had been stirred instead.

"Fah! Here's more of this hateful soot hanging about," says he.  
"Let us open the window a bit and get a mouthful of air.  It's too 
close."

He raises the sash, and they both rest on the window-sill, half in 
and half out of the room.  The neighbouring houses are too near to 
admit of their seeing any sky without craning their necks and 
looking up, but lights in frowsy windows here and there, and the 
rolling of distant carriages, and the new expression that there is 
of the stir of men, they find to be comfortable.  Mr. Guppy, 
noiselessly tapping on the window-sill, resumes his whisperirig in 
quite a light-comedy tone.

"By the by, Tony, don't forget old Smallweed," meaning the younger 
of that name.  "I have not let him into this, you know.  That 
grandfather of his is too keen by half.  It runs in the family."

"I remember," says Tony.  "I am up to all that."

"And as to Krook," resumes Mr. Guppy.  "Now, do you suppose he 
really has got hold of any other papers of importance, as he has 
boasted to you, since you have been such allies?"

Tony shakes his head.  "I don't know.  Can't Imagine.  If we get 
through this business without rousing his suspicions, I shall be 
better informed, no doubt.  How can I know without seeing them, 
when he don't know himself?  He is always spelling out words from 
them, and chalking them over the table and the shop-wall, and 
asking what this is and what that is; but his whole stock from 
beginning to end may easily be the waste-paper he bought it as, for 
anything I can say.  It's a monomania with him to think he is 
possessed of documents.  He has been going to learn to read them 
this last quarter of a century, I should judge, from what he tells 
me."

"How did he first come by that idea, though?  That's the question," 
Mr. Guppy suggests with one eye shut, after a little forensic 
meditation.  "He may have found papers in something he bought, 
where papers were not supposed to be, and may have got it into his 
shrewd head from the manner and place of their concealment that 
they are worth something."

"Or he may have been taken in, in some pretended bargain.  Or he 
may have been muddled altogether by long staring at whatever he HAS 
got, and by drink, and by hanging about the Lord Chancellor's Court 
and hearing of documents for ever," returns Mr. Weevle.

Mr. Guppy sitting on the window-sill, nodding his head and 
balancing all these possibilities in his mind, continues 
thoughtfully to tap it, and clasp it, and measure it with his hand, 
until he hastily draws his hand away.

"What, in the devil's name," he says, "is this!  Look at my 
fingers!"

A thick, yellow liquor defiles them, which is offensive to the 
touch and sight and more offensive to the smell.  A stagnant, 
sickening oil with some natural repulsion in it that makes them 
both shudder.

"What have you been doing here?  What have you been pouring out of 
window?"

"I pouring out of window!  Nothing, I swear!  Never, since I have 
been here!" cries the lodger.

And yet look here--and look here!  When he brings the candle here, 
from the corner of the window-sill, it slowly drips and creeps away 
down the bricks, here lies in a little thick nauseous pool.

"This is a horrible house," says Mr. Guppy, shutting down the 
window.  "Give me some water or I shall cut my hand off."

He so washes, and rubs, and scrubs, and smells, and washes, that he 
has not long restored himself with a glass of brandy and stood 
silently before the fire when Saint Paul's bell strikes twelve and 
all those other bells strike twelve from their towers of various 
heights in the dark air, and in their many tones.  When all is 
quiet again, the lodger says, "It's the appointed time at last.  
Shall I go?"

Mr. Guppy nods and gives him a "lucky touch" on the back, but not 
with the washed hand, though it is his right hand.

He goes downstairs, and Mr. Guppy tries to compose himself before 
the fire for waiting a long time.  But in no more than a minute or 
two the stairs creak and Tony comes swiftly back.

"Have you got them?"

"Got them!  No.  The old man's not there."

He has been so horribly frightened in the short interval that his 
terror seizes the other, who makes a rush at him and asks loudly, 
"What's the matter?"

"I couldn't make him hear, and I softly opened the door and looked 
in.  And the burning smell is there--and the soot is there, and the 
oil is there--and he is not there!"  Tony ends this with a groan.

Mr. Guppy takes the light.  They go down, more dead than alive, and 
holding one another, push open the door of the back shop.  The cat 
has retreated close to it and stands snarling, not at them, at 
something on the ground before the fire.  There is a very little 
fire left in the grate, but there is a smouldering, suffocating 
vapour in the room and a dark, greasy coating on the walls and 
ceiling.  The chairs and table, and the bottle so rarely absent 
from the table, all stand as usual.  On one chair-back hang the old 
man's hairy cap and coat.

"Look!" whispers the lodger, pointing his friend's attention to 
these objects with a trembling finger.  "I told you so.  When I saw 
him last, he took his cap off, took out the little bundle of old 
letters, hung his cap on the back of the chair--his coat was there 
already, for he had pulled that off before he went to put the 
shutters up--and I left him turning the letters over in his hand, 
standing just where that crumbled black thing is upon the floor."

Is he hanging somewhere?  They look up.  No.

"See!" whispers Tony.  "At the foot of the same chair there lies a 
dirty bit of thin red cord that they tie up pens with.  That went 
round the letters.  He undid it slowly, leering and laughing at me, 
before he began to turn them over, and threw it there.  I saw it 
fall."

"What's the matter with the cat?" says Mr. Guppy.  "Look at her!"

"Mad, I think.  And no wonder in this evil place."

They advance slowly, looking at all these things.  The cat remains 
where they found her, still snarling at the something on the ground 
before the fire and between the two chairs.  What is it?  Hold up 
the light.

Here is a small burnt patch of flooring; here is the tinder from a 
little bundle of burnt paper, but not so light as usual, seeming to 
be steeped in something; and here is--is it the cinder of a small 
charred and broken log of wood sprinkled with white ashes, or is it 
coal?  Oh, horror, he IS here!  And this from which we run away, 
striking out the light and overturning one another into the street, 
is all that represents him.

Help, help, help!  Come into this house for heaven's sake!  Plenty 
will come in, but none can help.  The Lord Chancellor of that 
court, true to his title in his last act, has died the death of all 
lord chancellors in all courts and of all authorities in all places 
under all names soever, where false pretences are made, and where 
injustice is done.  Call the death by any name your Highness will, 
attribute it to whom you will, or say it might have been prevented 
how you will, it is the same death eternally--inborn, inbred, 
engendered in the corrupted humours of the vicious body itself, and 
that only--spontaneous combustion, and none other of all the deaths 
that can be died.



CHAPTER XXXIII

Interlopers


Now do those two gentlemen not very neat about the cuffs and 
buttons who attended the last coroner's inquest at the Sol's Arms 
reappear in the precincts with surprising swiftness (being, in 
fact, breathlessly fetched by the active and intelligent beadle), 
and institute perquisitions through the court, and dive into the 
Sol's parlour, and write with ravenous little pens on tissue-paper.  
Now do they note down, in the watches of the night, how the 
neighbourhood of Chancery Lane was yesterday, at about midnight, 
thrown into a state of the most intense agitation and excitement by 
the following alarming and horrible discovery.  Now do they set 
forth how it will doubtless be remembered that some time back a 
painful sensation was created in the public mind by a case of 
mysterious death from opium occurring in the first floor of the 
house occupied as a rag, bottle, and general marine store shop, by 
an eccentric individual of intemperate habits, far advanced in 
life, named Krook; and how, by a remarkable coincidence, Krook was 
examined at the inquest, which it may be recollected was held on 
that occasion at the Sol's Arms, a well-conducted tavern 
immediately adjoining the premises in question on the west side and 
licensed to a highly respectable landlord, Mr. James George Bogsby.  
Now do they show (in as many words as possible) how during some 
hours of yesterday evening a very peculiar smell was observed by 
the inhabitants of the court, in which the tragical occurrence 
which forms the subject of that present account transpired; and 
which odour was at one time so powerful that Mr. Swills, a comic 
vocalist professionally engaged by Mr. J. G. Bogsby, has himself 
stated to our reporter that he mentioned to Miss M. Melvilleson, a 
lady of some pretensions to musical ability, likewise engaged by 
Mr. J. G. Bogsby to sing at a series of concerts called Harmonic 
Assemblies, or Meetings, which it would appear are held at the 
Sol's Arms under Mr. Bogsby's direction pursuant to the Act of 
George the Second, that he (Mr. Swills) found his voice seriously 
affected by the impure state of the atmosphere, his jocose 
expression at the time being that he was like an empty post-office, 
for he hadn't a single note in him.  How this account of Mr. Swills 
is entirely corroborated by two intelligent married females 
residing in the same court and known respectively by the names of 
Mrs. Piper and Mrs. Perkins, both of whom observed the foetid 
effluvia and regarded them as being emitted from the premises in 
the occupation of Krook, the unfortunate deceased.  All this and a 
great deal more the two gentlemen who have formed an amicable 
partnership in the melancholy catastrophe write down on the spot; 
and the boy population of the court (out of bed in a moment) swarm 
up the shutters of the Sol's Arms parlour, to behold the tops of 
their heads while they are about it.

The whole court, adult as well as boy, is sleepless for that night, 
and can do nothing but wrap up its many heads, and talk of the ill-
fated house, and look at it.  Miss Flite has been bravely rescued 
from her chamber, as if it were in flames, and accommodated with a 
bed at the Sol's Arms.  The Sol neither turns off its gas nor shuts 
its door all night, for any kind of public excitement makes good 
for the Sol and causes the court to stand in need of comfort.  The 
house has not done so much in the stomachic article of cloves or in 
brandy-and-water warm since the inquest.  The moment the pot-boy 
heard what had happened, he rolled up his shirt-sleeves tight to 
his shoulders and said, "There'll be a run upon us!"  In the first 
outcry, young Piper dashed off for the fire-engines and returned in 
triumph at a jolting gallop perched up aloft on the Phoenix and 
holding on to that fabulous creature with all his might in the 
midst of helmets and torches.  One helmet remains behind after 
careful investigation of all chinks and crannies and slowly paces 
up and down before the house in company with one of the two 
policemen who have likewise been left in charge thereof.  To this 
trio everybody in the court possessed of sixpence has an insatiate 
desire to exhibit hospitality in a liquid form.

Mr. Weevle and his friend Mr. Guppy are within the bar at the Sol 
and are worth anything to the Sol that the bar contains if they 
will only stay there.  "This is not a time, says Mr. Bogsby, "to 
haggle about money," though he looks something sharply after it, 
over the counter; "give your orders, you two gentlemen, and you're 
welcome to whatever you put a name to."

Thus entreated, the two gentlemen (Mr. Weevle especially) put names 
to so many things that in course of time they find it difficult to 
put a name to anything quite distinctly, though they still relate 
to all new-comers some version of the night they have had of it, 
and of what they said, and what they thought, and what they saw.  
Meanwhile, one or other of the policemen often flits about the 
door, and pushing it open a little way at the full length of his 
arm, looks in from outer gloom.  Not that he has any suspicions, 
but that he may as well know what they are up to in there.

Thus night pursues its leaden course, finding the court still out 
of bed through the unwonted hours, still treating and being 
treated, still conducting itself similarly to a court that has had 
a little money left it unexpectedly.  Thus night at length with 
slow-retreating steps departs, and the lamp-lighter going his 
rounds, like an executioner to a despotic king, strikes off the 
little heads of fire that have aspired to lessen the darkness.  
Thus the day cometh, whether or no.

And the day may discern, even with its dim London eye, that the 
court has been up all night.  Over and above the faces that have 
fallen drowsily on tables and the heels that lie prone on hard 
floors instead of beds, the brick and mortar physiognomy of the 
very court itself looks worn and jaded.  And now the neighbourhood, 
waking up and beginning to hear of what has happened, comes 
streaming in, half dressed, to ask questions; and the two policemen 
and the helmet (who are far less impressible externally than the 
court) have enough to do to keep the door.

"Good gracious, gentlemen!" says Mr. Snagsby, coming up.  "What's 
this I hear!"

"Why, it's true," returns one of the policemen.  "That's what it 
is.  Now move on here, come!"

"Why, good gracious, gentlemen," says Mr. Snagsby, somewhat 
promptly backed away, "I was at this door last night betwixt ten 
and eleven o'clock in conversation with the young man who lodges 
here."

"Indeed?" returns the policeman.  "You will find the young man next 
door then.  Now move on here, some of you,"

"Not hurt, I hope?" says Mr. Snagsby.

"Hurt?  No.  What's to hurt him!"

Mr. Snagsby, wholly unable to answer this or any question in his 
troubled mind, repairs to the Sol's Arms and finds Mr. Weevle 
languishing over tea and toast with a considerable expression on 
him of exhausted excitement and exhausted tobacco-smoke.

"And Mr. Guppy likewise!" quoth Mr. Snagsby.  "Dear, dear, dear!  
What a fate there seems in all this!  And my lit--"

Mr. Snagsby's power of speech deserts him in the formation of the 
words "my little woman."  For to see that injured female walk into 
the Sol's Arms at that hour of the morning and stand before the 
beer-engine, with her eyes fixed upon him like an accusing spirit, 
strikes him dumb.

"My dear," says Mr. Snagsby when his tongue is loosened, "will you 
take anything?  A little--not to put too fine a point upon it--drop 
of shrub?"

"No," says Mrs. Snagsby.

"My love, you know these two gentlemen?"

"Yes!" says Mrs. Snagsby, and in a rigid manner acknowledges their 
presence, still fixing Mr. Snagsby with her eye.

The devoted Mr. Snagsby cannot bear this treatment.  He takes Mrs. 
Snagsby by the hand and leads her aside to an adjacent cask.

"My little woman, why do you look at me in that way?  Pray don't do 
it."

"I can't help my looks," says Mrs. Snagsby, "and if I could I 
wouldn't."

Mr. Snagsby, with his cough of meekness, rejoins, "Wouldn't you 
really, my dear?" and meditates.  Then coughs his cough of trouble 
and says, "This is a dreadful mystery, my love!" still fearfully 
disconcerted by Mrs. Snagsby's eye.

"It IS," returns Mrs. Snagsby, shaking her head, "a dreadful 
mystery."

"My little woman," urges Mr. Snagsby in a piteous manner, "don't 
for goodness' sake speak to me with that bitter expression and look 
at me in that searching way!  I beg and entreat of you not to do 
it.  Good Lord, you don't suppose that I would go spontaneously 
combusting any person, my dear?"

"I can't say," returns Mrs. Snagsby.

On a hasty review of his unfortunate position, Mr. Snagsby "can't 
say" either.  He is not prepared positively to deny that he may 
have had something to do with it.  He has had something--he don't 
know what--to do with so much in this connexion that is mysterious 
that it is possible he may even be implicated, without knowing it, 
in the present transaction.  He faintly wipes his forehead with his 
handkerchief and gasps.

"My life," says the unhappy stationer, "would you have any 
objections to mention why, being in general so delicately 
circumspect in your conduct, you come into a wine-vaults before 
breakfast?"

"Why do YOU come here?" inquires Mrs. Snagsby.

"My dear, merely to know the rights of the fatal accident which has 
happened to the venerable party who has been--combusted."  Mr. 
Snagsby has made a pause to suppress a groan.  "I should then have 
related them to you, my love, over your French roll."

"I dare say you would!  You relate everything to me, Mr. Snagsby."

"Every--my lit--"

"I should be glad," says Mrs. Snagsby after contemplating his 
increased confusion with a severe and sinister smile, "if you would 
come home with me; I think you may be safer there, Mr. Snagsby, 
than anywhere else."

"My love, I don't know but what I may be, I am sure.  I am ready to 
go."

Mr. Snagsby casts his eye forlornly round the bar, gives Messrs. 
Weevle and Guppy good morning, assures them of the satisfaction 
with which he sees them uninjured, and accompanies Mrs. Snagsby 
from the Sol's Arms.  Before night his doubt whether he may not be 
responsible for some inconceivable part in the catastrophe which is 
the talk of the whole neighbourhood is almost resolved into 
certainty by Mrs. Snagsby's pertinacity in that fixed gaze.  His 
mental sufferings are so great that he entertains wandering ideas 
of delivering himself up to justice and requiring to be cleared if 
innocent and punished with the utmost rigour of the law if guilty.

Mr. Weevle and Mr. Guppy, having taken their breakfast, step into 
Lincoln's Inn to take a little walk about the square and clear as 
many of the dark cobwebs out of their brains as a little walk may.

"There can be no more favourable time than the present, Tony," says 
Mr. Guppy after they have broodingly made out the four sides of the 
square, "for a word or two between us upon a point on which we 
must, with very little delay, come to an understanding."

"Now, I tell you what, William G.!" returns the other, eyeing his 
companion with a bloodshot eye.  "If it's a point of conspiracy, 
you needn't take the trouble to mention it.  I have had enough of 
that, and I ain't going to have any more.  We shall have YOU taking 
fire next or blowing up with a bang."

This supposititious phenomenon is so very disagreeable to Mr. Guppy 
that his voice quakes as he says in a moral way, "Tony, I should 
have thought that what we went through last night would have been a 
lesson to you never to be personal any more as long as you lived."  
To which Mr. Weevle returns, "William, I should have thought it 
would have been a lesson to YOU never to conspire any more as long 
as you lived."  To which Mr. Guppy says, "Who's conspiring?"  To 
which Mr. Jobling replies, "Why, YOU are!"  To which Mr. Guppy 
retorts, "No, I am not."  To which Mr. Jobling retorts again, "Yes, 
you are!"  To which Mr. Guppy retorts, "Who says so?"  To which Mr. 
Jobling retorts, "I say so!"  To which Mr. Guppy retorts, "Oh, 
indeed?"  To which Mr. Jobling retorts, "Yes, indeed!"  And both 
being now in a heated state, they walk on silently for a while to 
cool down again.

"Tony," says Mr. Guppy then, "if you heard your friend out instead 
of flying at him, you wouldn't fall into mistakes.  But your temper 
is hasty and you are not considerate.  Possessing in yourself, 
Tony, all that is calculated to charm the eye--"

"Oh! Blow the eye!" cries Mr. Weevle, cutting him short.  "Say what 
you have got to say!"

Finding his friend in this morose and material condition, Mr. Guppy 
only expresses the finer feelings of his soul through the tone of 
injury in which he recommences, "Tony, when I say there is a point 
on which we must come to an understanding pretty soon, I say so 
quite apart from any kind of conspiring, however innocent.  You 
know it is professionally arranged beforehand in all cases that are 
tried what facts the witnesses are to prove.  Is it or is it not 
desirable that we should know what facts we are to prove on the 
inquiry into the death of this unfortunate old mo--gentleman?"  
(Mr. Guppy was going to say "mogul," but thinks "gentleman" better 
suited to the circumstances.)

"What facts?  THE facts."

"The facts bearing on that inquiry.  Those are"--Mr. Guppy tells 
them off on his fingers--"what we knew of his habits, when you saw 
him last, what his condition was then, the discovery that we made, 
and how we made it."

"Yes," says Mr. Weevle.  "Those are about the facts."

"We made the discovery in consequence of his having, in his 
eccentric way, an appointment with you at twelve o'clock at night, 
when you were to explain some writing to him as you had often done 
before on account of his not being able to read.  I, spending the 
evening with you, was called down--and so forth.  The inquiry being 
only into the circumstances touching the death of the deceased, 
it's not necessary to go beyond these facts, I suppose you'll 
agree?"

"No!" returns Mr. Weevle.  "I suppose not."

"And this is not a conspiracy, perhaps?" says the injured Guppy.

"No," returns his friend; "if it's nothing worse than this, I 
withdraw the observation."

"Now, Tony," says Mr. Guppy, taking his arm again and walking him 
slowly on, "I should like to know, in a friendly way, whether you 
have yet thought over the many advantages of your continuing to 
live at that place?"

"What do you mean?" says Tony, stopping.

"Whether you have yet thought over the many advantages of your 
continuing to live at that place?" repeats Mr. Guppy, walking him 
on again.

"At what place?  THAT place?" pointing in the direction of the rag 
and bottle shop.

Mr. Guppy nods.

"Why, I wouldn't pass another night there for any consideration 
that you could offer me," says Mr. Weevle, haggardly staring.

"Do you mean it though, Tony?"

"Mean it!  Do I look as if I mean it?  I feel as if I do; I know 
that," says Mr. Weevle with a very genuine shudder.

"Then the possibility or probability--for such it must be 
considered--of your never being disturbed in possession of those 
effects lately belonging to a lone old man who seemed to have no 
relation in the world, and the certainty of your being able to find 
out what he really had got stored up there, don't weigh with you at 
all against last night, Tony, if I understand you?" says Mr. Guppy, 
biting his thumb with the appetite of vexation.

"Certainly not.  Talk in that cool way of a fellow's living there?" 
cries Mr. Weevle indignantly.  "Go and live there yourself."

"Oh! I, Tony!" says Mr. Guppy, soothing him.  "I have never lived 
there and couldn't get a lodging there now, whereas you have got 
one."

"You are welcome to it," rejoins his friend, "and--ugh!--you may 
make yourself at home in it."

"Then you really and truly at this point," says Mr. Guppy, "give up 
the whole thing, if I understand you, Tony?"

"You never," returns Tony with a most convincing steadfastness, 
"said a truer word in all your life.  I do!"

While they are so conversing, a hackney-coach drives into the 
square, on the box of which vehicle a very tall hat makes itself 
manifest to the public.  Inside the coach, and consequently not so 
manifest to the multitude, though sufficiently so to the two 
friends, for the coach stops almost at their feet, are the 
venerable Mr. Smallweed and Mrs. Smallweed, accompanied by their 
granddaughter Judy.

An air of haste and excitement pervades the party, and as the tall 
hat (surmounting Mr. Smallweed the younger) alights, Mr. Smallweed 
the elder pokes his head out of window and bawls to Mr. Guppy, "How 
de do, sir!  How de do!"

"What do Chick and his family want here at this time of the 
morning, I wonder!" says Mr. Guppy, nodding to his familiar.

"My dear sir," cries Grandfather Smallweed, "would you do me a 
favour?  Would you and your friend be so very obleeging as to carry 
me into the public-house in the court, while Bart and his sister 
bring their grandmother along?  Would you do an old man that good 
turn, sir?"

Mr. Guppy looks at his friend, repeating inquiringly, "The public-
house in the court?"  And they prepare to bear the venerable burden 
to the Sol's Arms.

"There's your fare!" says the patriarch to the coachman with a 
fierce grin and shaking his incapable fist at him.  "Ask me for a 
penny more, and I'll have my lawful revenge upon you.  My dear 
young men, be easy with me, if you please.  Allow me to catch you 
round the neck.  I won't squeeze you tighter than I can help.  Oh, 
Lord!  Oh, dear me!  Oh, my bones!"

It is well that the Sol is not far off, for Mr. Weevle presents an 
apoplectic appearance before half the distance is accomplished.  
With no worse aggravation of his symptoms, however, than the 
utterance of divers croaking sounds expressive of obstructed 
respiration, he fulils his share of the porterage and the 
benevolent old gentleman is deposited by his own desire in the 
parlour of the Sol's Arms.

"Oh, Lord!" gasps Mr. Smallweed, looking about him, breathless, 
from an arm-chair.  "Oh, dear me!  Oh, my bones and back!  Oh, my 
aches and pains!  Sit down, you dancing, prancing, shambling, 
scrambling poll-parrot!  Sit down!"

This little apostrophe to Mrs. Smallweed is occasioned by a 
propensity on the part of that unlucky old lady whenever she finds 
herself on her feet to amble about and "set" to inanimate objects, 
accompanying herself with a chattering noise, as in a witch dance.  
A nervous affection has probably as much to do with these 
demonstrations as any imbecile intention in the poor old woman, but 
on the present occasion they are so particularly lively in 
connexion with the Windsor arm-chair, fellow to that in which Mr. 
Smallweed is seated, that she only quite desists when her 
grandchildren have held her down in it, her lord in the meanwhile 
bestowing upon her, with great volubility, the endearing epithet of 
"a pig-headed jackdaw," repeated a surprising number of times.

"My dear sir," Grandfather Smallweed then proceeds, addressing Mr. 
Guppy, "there has been a calamity here.  Have you heard of it, 
either of you?"

"Heard of it, sir!  Why, we discovered it."

"You discovered it.  You two discovered it!  Bart, THEY discovered 
it!"

The two discoverers stare at the Smallweeds, who return the 
compliment.

"My dear friends," whines Grandfather Smallweed, putting out both 
his hands, "I owe you a thousand thanks for discharging the 
melancholy office of discovering the ashes of Mrs. Smallweed's 
brother."

"Eh?" says Mr. Guppy.

"Mrs. Smallweed's brother, my dear friend--her only relation.  We 
were not on terms, which is to be deplored now, but he never WOULD 
be on terms.  He was not fond of us.  He was eccentric--he was very 
eccentric.  Unless he has left a will (which is not at all likely) 
I shall take out letters of administration.  I have come down to 
look after the property; it must be sealed up, it must be 
protected.  I have come down," repeats Grandfather Smallweed, 
hooking the air towards him with all his ten fingers at once, "to 
look after the property."

"I think, Small," says the disconsolate Mr. Guppy, "you might have 
mentioned that the old man was your uncle."

"You two were so close about him that I thought you would like me 
to be the same," returns that old bird with a secretly glistening 
eye.  "Besides, I wasn't proud of him."

"Besides which, it was nothing to you, you know, whether he was or 
not," says Judy.  Also with a secretly glistening eye.

"He never saw me in his life to know me," observed Small; "I don't 
know why I should introduce HIM, I am sure!"

"No, he never communicated with us, which is to be deplored," the 
old gentleman strikes in, "but I have come to look after the 
property--to look over the papers, and to look after the property.  
We shall make good our title.  It is in the hands of my solicitor.  
Mr. Tulkinghorn, of Lincoln's Inn Fields, over the way there, is so 
good as to act as my solicitor; and grass don't grow under HIS 
feet, I can tell ye.  Krook was Mrs. Smallweed's only brother; she 
had no relation but Krook, and Krook had no relation but Mrs. 
Smallweed.  I am speaking of your brother, you brimstone black-
beetle, that was seventy-six years of age."

Mrs. Smallweed instantly begins to shake her head and pipe up, 
"Seventy-six pound seven and sevenpence!  Seventysix thousand bags 
of money!  Seventy-six hundred thousand million of parcels of bank-
notes!"

"Will somebody give me a quart pot?" exclaims her exasperated 
husband, looking helplessly about him and finding no missile within 
his reach.  "Will somebody obleege me with a spittoon?  Will 
somebody hand me anything hard and bruising to pelt at her?  You 
hag, you cat, you dog, you brimstone barker!"  Here Mr. Smallweed, 
wrought up to the highest pitch by his own eloquence, actually 
throws Judy at her grandmother in default of anything else, by 
butting that young virgin at the old lady with such force as he can 
muster and then dropping into his chair in a heap.

"Shake me up, somebody, if you'll he so good," says the voice from 
within the faintly struggling bundle into which he has collapsed.  
"I have come to look after the property.  Shake me up, and call in 
the police on duty at the next house to be explained to about the 
property.  My solicitor will be here presently to protect the 
property.  Transportation or the gallows for anybody who shall 
touch the property!"  As his dutiful grandchildren set him up, 
panting, and putting him through the usual restorative process of 
shaking and punching, he still repeats like an echo, "The--the 
property!  The property!  Property!"

Mr. Weevle and Mr. Guppy look at each other, the former as having 
relinquished the whole affair, the latter with a discomfited 
countenance as having entertained some lingering expectations yet.  
But there is nothing to be done in opposition to the Smallweed 
interest.  Mr. Tulkinghorn's clerk comes down from his official pew 
in the chambers to mention to the police that Mr. Tulkinghorn is 
answerable for its being all correct about the next of kin and that 
the papers and effects will be formally taken possession of in due 
time and course.  Mr. Smallweed is at once permitted so far to 
assert his supremacy as to be carried on a visit of sentiment into 
the next house and upstairs into Miss Flite's deserted room, where 
he looks like a hideous bird of prey newly added to her aviary.

The arrival of this unexpected heir soon taking wind in the court 
still makes good for the Sol and keeps the court upon its mettle.  
Mrs. Piper and Mrs. Perkins think it hard upon the young man if 
there really is no will, and consider that a handsome present ought 
to be made him out of the estate.  Young Piper and young Perkins, 
as members of that restless juvenile circle which is the terror of 
the foot-passengers in Chancery Lane, crumble into ashes behind the 
pump and under the archway all day long, where wild yells and 
hootings take place over their remains.  Little Swills and Miss M. 
Melvilleson enter into affable conversation with their patrons, 
feeling that these unusual occurrences level the barriers between 
professionals and non-professionals.  Mr. Bogsby puts up "The 
popular song of King Death, with chorus by the whole strength of 
the company," as the great Harmonic feature of the week and 
announces in the bill that "J. G. B. is induced to do so at a 
considerable extra expense in consequence of a wish which has been 
very generally expressed at the bar by a large body of respectable 
individuals and in homage to a late melancholy event which has 
aroused so much sensation."  There is one point connected with the 
deceased upon which the court is particularly anxious, namely, that 
the fiction of a full-sized coffin should be preserved, though 
there is so little to put in it.  Upon the undertaker's stating in 
the Sol's bar in the course of the day that he has received orders 
to construct "a six-footer," the general solicitude is much 
relieved, and it is considered that Mr. Smallweed's conduct does 
him great honour.

Out of the court, and a long way out of it, there is considerable 
excitement too, for men of science and philosophy come to look, and 
carriages set down doctors at the corner who arrive with the same 
intent, and there is more learned talk about inflammable gases and 
phosphuretted hydrogen than the court has ever imagined.  Some of 
these authorities (of course the wisest) hold with indignation that 
the deceased had no business to die in the alleged manner; and 
being reminded by other authorities of a certain inquiry into the 
evidence for such deaths reprinted in the sixth volume of the 
Philosophical Transactions; and also of a book not quite unknown on 
English medical jurisprudence; and likewise of the Italian case of 
the Countess Cornelia Baudi as set forth in detail by one 
Bianchini, prebendary of Verona, who wrote a scholarly work or so 
and was occasionally heard of in his time as having gleams of 
reason in him; and also of the testimony of Messrs. Fodere and 
Mere, two pestilent Frenchmen who WOULD investigate the subject; 
and further, of the corroborative testimony of Monsieur Le Cat, a 
rather celebrated French surgeon once upon a time, who had the 
unpoliteness to live in a house where such a case occurred and even 
to write an account of it--still they regard the late Mr. Krook's 
obstinacy in going out of the world by any such by-way as wholly 
unjustifiable and personally offensive.  The less the court 
understands of all this, the more the court likes it, and the 
greater enjoyment it has in the stock in trade of the Sol's Arms.  
Then there comes the artist of a picture newspaper, with a 
foreground and figures ready drawn for anything from a wreck on the 
Cornish coast to a review in Hyde Park or a meeting in Manchester, 
and in Mrs. Perkins' own room, memorable evermore, he then and 
there throws in upon the block Mr. Krook's house, as large as life; 
in fact, considerably larger, making a very temple of it.  
Similarly, being permitted to look in at the door of the fatal 
chamber, he depicts that apartment as three-quarters of a mile long 
by fifty yards high, at which the court is particularly charmed.  
All this time the two gentlemen before mentioned pop in and out of 
every house and assist at the philosophical disputations--go 
everywhere and listen to everybody--and yet are always diving into 
the Sol's parlour and writing with the ravenous little pens on the 
tissue-paper.

At last come the coroner and his inquiry, like as before, except 
that the coroner cherishes this case as being out of the common way 
and tells the gentlemen of the jury, in his private capacity, that 
"that would seem to be an unlucky house next door, gentlemen, a 
destined house; but so we sometimes find it, and these are 
mysteries we can't account for!"  After which the six-footer comes 
into action and is much admired.

In all these proceedings Mr. Guppy has so slight a part, except 
when he gives his evidence, that he is moved on like a private 
individual and can only haunt the secret house on the outside, 
where he has the mortification of seeing Mr. Smallweed padlocking 
the door, and of bitterly knowing himself to be shut out.  But 
before these proceedings draw to a close, that is to say, on the 
night next after the catastrophe, Mr. Guppy has a thing to say that 
must be said to Lady Dedlock.

For which reason, with a sinking heart and with that hang-dog sense 
of guilt upon him which dread and watching enfolded in the Sol's 
Arms have produced, the young man of the name of Guppy presents 
himself at the town mansion at about seven o'clock in the evening 
and requests to see her ladyship.  Mercury replies that she is 
going out to dinner; don't he see the carriage at the door?  Yes, 
he does see the carriage at the door; but he wants to see my Lady 
too.

Mercury is disposed, as he will presently declare to a fellow-
gentleman in waiting, "to pitch into the young man"; but his 
instructions are positive.  Therefore he sulkily supposes that the 
young man must come up into the library.  There he leaves the young 
man in a large room, not over-light, while he makes report of him.

Mr. Guppy looks into the shade in all directions, discovering 
everywhere a certain charred and whitened little heap of coal or 
wood.  Presently he hears a rustling.  Is it--?  No, it's no ghost, 
but fair flesh and blood, most brilliantly dressed.

"I have to beg your ladyship's pardon," Mr. Guppy stammers, very 
downcast.  "This is an inconvenient time--"

"I told you, you could come at any time."  She takes a chair, 
looking straight at him as on the last occasion.

"Thank your ladyship.  Your ladyship is very affable."

"You can sit down."  There is not much affability in her tone.

"I don't know, your ladyship, that it's worth while my sitting down 
and detaining you, for I--I have not got the letters that I 
mentioned when I had the honour of waiting on your ladyship."

"Have you come merely to say so?"

"Merely to say so, your ladyship."  Mr. Guppy besides being 
depressed, disappointed, and uneasy, is put at a further 
disadvantage by the splendour and beauty of her appearance.

She knows its influence perfectly, has studied it too well to miss 
a grain of its effect on any one.  As she looks at him so steadily 
and coldly, he not only feels conscious that he has no guide in the 
least perception of what is really the complexion of her thoughts, 
but also that he is being every moment, as it were, removed further 
and further from her.

She will not speak, it is plain.  So he must.

"In short, your ladyship," says Mr. Guppy like a meanly penitent 
thief, "the person I was to have had the letters of, has come to a 
sudden end, and--"  He stops.  Lady Dedlock calmly finishes the 
sentence.

"And the letters are destroyed with the person?"

Mr. Guppy would say no if he could--as he is unable to hide.

"I believe so, your ladyship."

If he could see the least sparkle of relief in her face now?  No, 
he could see no such thing, even if that brave outside did not 
utterly put him away, and he were not looking beyond it and about 
it.

He falters an awkward excuse or two for his failure.

"Is this all you have to say?" inquires Lady Dedlock, having heard 
him out--or as nearly out as he can stumble.

Mr. Guppy thinks that's all.

"You had better be sure that you wish to say nothing more to me, 
this being the last time you will have the opportunity."

Mr. Guppy is quite sure.  And indeed he has no such wish at 
present, by any means.

"That is enough.  I will dispense with excuses.  Good evening to 
you!"  And she rings for Mercury to show the young man of the name 
of Guppy out.

But in that house, in that same moment, there happens to be an old 
man of the name of Tulkinghorn.  And that old man, coming with his 
quiet footstep to the library, has his hand at that moment on the 
handle of the door--comes in--and comes face to face with the young 
man as he is leaving the room.

One glance between the old man and the lady, and for an instant the 
blind that is always down flies up.  Suspicion, eager and sharp, 
looks out.  Another instant, close again.

"I beg your pardon, Lady Dedlock.  I beg your pardon a thousand 
times.  It is so very unusual to find you here at this hour.  I 
supposed the room was empty.  I beg your pardon!"

"Stay!"  She negligently calls him back.  "Remain here, I beg.  I 
am going out to dinner.  I have nothing more to say to this young 
man!"

The disconcerted young man bows, as he goes out, and cringingly 
hopes that Mr. Tulkinghorn of the Fields is well.

"Aye, aye?" says the lawyer, looking at him from under his bent 
brows, though he has no need to look again--not he.  "From Kenge 
and Carboy's, surely?"

"Kenge and Carboy's, Mr. Tulkinghorn.  Name of Guppy, sir."

"To be sure.  Why, thank you, Mr. Guppy, I am very well!"

"Happy to hear it, sir.  You can't be too well, sir, for the credit 
of the profession."

"Thank you, Mr. Guppy!"

Mr. Guppy sneaks away.  Mr. Tulkinghorn, such a foil in his old-
fashioned rusty black to Lady Dedlock's brightness, hands her down 
the staircase to her carriage.  He returns rubbing his chin, and 
rubs it a good deal in the course of the evening.



CHAPTER XXXIV

A Turn of the Screw


"Now, what," says Mr. George, "may this be?  Is it blank cartridge 
or ball?  A flash in the pan or a shot?"

An open letter is the subject of the trooper's speculations, and it 
seems to perplex him mightily.  He looks at it at arm's length, 
brings it close to him, holds it in his right hand, holds it in his 
left hand, reads it with his head on this side, with his head on 
that side, contracts his eyebrows, elevates them, still cannot 
satisfy himself.  He smooths it out upon the table with his heavy 
palm, and thoughtfully walking up and down the gallery, makes a 
halt before it every now and then to come upon it with a fresh eye.  
Even that won't do.  "Is it," Mr. George still muses, "blank 
cartridge or ball?"

Phil Squod, with the aid of a brush and paint-pot, is employed in 
the distance whitening the targets, softly whistling in quick-march 
time and in drum-and-fife manner that he must and will go back 
again to the girl he left behind him.

"Phil!"  The trooper beckons as he calls him.

Phil approaches in his usual way, sidling off at first as if he 
were going anywhere else and then bearing down upon his commander 
like a bayonet-charge.  Certain splashes of white show in high 
relief upon his dirty face, and he scrapes his one eyebrow with the 
handle of the brush.

"Attention, Phil!  Listen to this."

"Steady, commander, steady."

"'Sir.  Allow me to remind you (though there is no legal necessity 
for my doing so, as you are aware) that the bill at two months' 
date drawn on yourself by Mr. Matthew Bagnet, and by you accepted, 
for the sum of ninety-seven pounds four shillings and ninepence, 
will become due to-morrow, when you will please be prepared to take 
up the same on presentation.  Yours, Joshua Smallweed.'  What do 
you make of that, Phil?"

"Mischief, guv'ner."

"Why?"

"I think," replies Phil after pensively tracing out a cross-wrinkle 
in his forehead with the brush-handle, "that mischeevious 
consequences is always meant when money's asked for."

"Lookye, Phil," says the trooper, sitting on the table.  "First and 
last, I have paid, I may say, half as much again as this principal 
in interest and one thing and another."

Phil intimates by sidling back a pace or two, with a very 
unaccountable wrench of his wry face, that he does not regard the 
transaction as being made more promising by this incident.

"And lookye further, Phil," says the trooper, staying his premature 
conclusions with a wave of his hand.  "There has always been an 
understanding that this bill was to be what they call renewed.  And 
it has been renewed no end of times.  What do you say now?"

"I say that I think the times is come to a end at last."

"You do?  Humph!  I am much of the same mind myself."

"Joshua Smallweed is him that was brought here in a chair?"

"The same."

"Guv'ner," says Phil with exceeding gravity, "he's a leech in his 
dispositions, he's a screw and a wice in his actions, a snake in 
his twistings, and a lobster in his claws."

Having thus expressively uttered his sentiments, Mr. Squod, after 
waiting a little to ascertain if any further remark be expected of 
him, gets back by his usual series of movements to the target he 
has in hand and vigorously signifies through his former musical 
medium that he must and he will return to that ideal young lady.  
George, having folded the letter, walks in that direction.

"There IS a way, commander," says Phil, looking cunningly at him, 
"of settling this."

"Paying the money, I suppose?  I wish I could."

Phil shakes his head.  "No, guv'ner, no; not so bad as that.  There 
IS a way," says Phil with a highly artistic turn of his brush; 
"what I'm a-doing at present."

"Whitewashing."

Phil nods.

"A pretty way that would be!  Do you know what would become of the 
Bagnets in that case?  Do you know they would be ruined to pay off 
my old scores?  YOU'RE a moral character," says the trooper, eyeing 
him in his large way with no small indignation; "upon my life you 
are, Phil!"

Phil, on one knee at the target, is in course of protesting 
earnestly, though not without many allegorical scoops of his brush 
and smoothings of the white surface round the rim with his thumb, 
that he had forgotten the Bagnet responsibility and would not so 
much as injure a hair of the head of any member of that worthy 
family when steps are audible in the long passage without, and a 
cheerful voice is heard to wonder whether George is at home.  Phil, 
with a look at his master, hobbles up, saying, "Here's the guv'ner, 
Mrs. Bagnet!  Here he is!" and the old girl herself, accompanied by 
Mr. Bagnet, appears.

The old girl never appears in walking trim, in any season of the 
year, without a grey cloth cloak, coarse and much worn but very 
clean, which is, undoubtedly, the identical garment rendered so 
interesting to Mr. Bagnet by having made its way home to Europe 
from another quarter of the globe in company with Mrs. Bagnet and 
an umbrella.  The latter faithful appendage is also invariably a 
part of the old girl's presence out of doors.  It is of no colour 
known in this life and has a corrugated wooden crook for a handle, 
with a metallic object let into its prow, or beak, resembling a 
little model of a fanlight over a street door or one of the oval 
glasses out of a pair of spectacles, which ornamental object has 
not that tenacious capacity of sticking to its post that might be 
desired in an article long associated with the British army.  The 
old girl's umbrella is of a flabby habit of waist and seems to be 
in need of stays--an appearance that is possibly referable to its 
having served through a series of years at home as a cupboard and 
on journeys as a carpet bag.  She never puts it up, having the 
greatest reliance on her well-proved cloak with its capacious hood, 
but generally uses the instrument as a wand with which to point out 
joints of meat or bunches of greens in marketing or to arrest the 
attention of tradesmen by a friendly poke.  Without her market-
basket, which is a sort of wicker well with two flapping lids, she 
never stirs abroad.  Attended by these her trusty companions, 
therefore, her honest sunburnt face looking cheerily out of a rough 
straw bonnet, Mrs. Bagnet now arrives, fresh-coloured and bright, 
in George's Shooting Gallery.

"Well, George, old fellow," says she, "and how do YOU do, this 
sunshiny morning?"

Giving him a friendly shake of the hand, Mrs. Bagnet draws a long 
breath after her walk and sits down to enjoy a rest.  Having a 
faculty, matured on the tops of baggage-waggons and in other such 
positions, of resting easily anywhere, she perches on a rough 
bench, unties her bonnet-strings, pushes back her bonnet, crosses 
her arms, and looks perfectly comfortable.

Mr. Bagnet in the meantime has shaken hands with his old comrade 
and with Phil, on whom Mrs. Bagnet likewise bestows a good-humoured 
nod and smile.

"Now, George," said Mrs. Bagnet briskly, "here we are, Lignum and 
myself"--she often speaks of her husband by this appellation, on 
account, as it is supposed, of Lignum Vitae having been his old 
regimental nickname when they first became acquainted, in 
compliment to the extreme hardness and toughness of his 
physiognomy--"just looked in, we have, to make it all correct as 
usual about that security.  Give him the new bill to sign, George, 
and he'll sign it like a man."

"I was coming to you this morning," observes the trooper 
reluctantly.

"Yes, we thought you'd come to us this morning, but we turned out 
early and left Woolwich, the best of boys, to mind his sisters and 
came to you instead--as you see!  For Lignum, he's tied so close 
now, and gets so little exercise, that a walk does him good.  But 
what's the matter, George?" asks Mrs. Bagnet, stopping in her 
cheerful talk.  "You don't look yourself."

"I am not quite myself," returns the trooper; "I have been a little 
put out, Mrs. Bagnet."

Her bright quick eye catches the truth directly.  "George!" holding 
up her forefinger.  "Don't tell me there's anything wrong about 
that security of Lignum's!  Don't do it, George, on account of the 
children!"

The trooper looks at her with a troubled visage.

"George," says Mrs. Bagnet, using both her arms for emphasis and 
occasionally bringing down her open hands upon her knees.  "If you 
have allowed anything wrong to come to that security of Lignum's, 
and if you have let him in for it, and if you have put us in danger 
of being sold up--and I see sold up in your face, George, as plain 
as print--you have done a shameful action and have deceived us 
cruelly.  I tell you, cruelly, George.  There!"

Mr. Bagnet, otherwise as immovable as a pump or a lamp-post, puts 
his large right hand on the top of his bald head as if to defend it 
from a shower-bath and looks with great uneasiness at Mrs. Bagnet.

"George," says that old girl, "I wonder at you!  George, I am 
ashamed of you!  George, I couldn't have believed you would have 
done it!  I always knew you to be a rolling sone that gathered no 
moss, but I never thought you would have taken away what little 
moss there was for Bagnet and the children to lie upon.  You know 
what a hard-working, steady-going chap he is.  You know what Quebec 
and Malta and Woolwich are, and I never did think you would, or 
could, have had the heart to serve us so.  Oh, George!"  Mrs. 
Bagnet gathers up her cloak to wipe her eyes on in a very genuine 
manner, "How could you do it?"

Mrs. Bagnet ceasing, Mr. Bagnet removes his hand from his head as 
if the shower-bath were over and looks disconsolately at Mr. 
George, who has turned quite white and looks distressfully at the 
grey cloak and straw bonnet.

"Mat," says the trooper in a subdued voice, addressing him but 
still looking at his wife, "I am sorry you take it so much to 
heart, because I do hope it's not so bad as that comes to.  I 
certainly have, this morning, received this letter"--which he reads 
aloud--"but I hope it may be set right yet.  As to a rolling stone, 
why, what you say is true.  I AM a rolling stone, and I never 
rolled in anybody's way, I fully believe, that I rolled the least 
good to.  But it's impossible for an old vagabond comrade to like 
your wife and family better than I like 'em, Mat, and I trust 
you'll look upon me as forgivingly as you can.  Don't think I've 
kept anything from you.  I haven't had the letter more than a 
quarter of an hour."

"Old girl," murmurs Mr. Bagnet after a short silence, "will you 
tell him my opinion?"

"Oh! Why didn't he marry," Mrs. Bagnet answers, half laughing and 
half crying, "Joe Pouch's widder in North America?  Then he 
wouldn't have got himself into these troubles."

"The old girl," says Mr. Baguet, "puts it correct--why didn't you?"

"Well, she has a better husband by this time, I hope," returns the 
trooper.  "Anyhow, here I stand, this present day, NOT married to 
Joe Pouch's widder.  What shall I do?  You see all I have got about 
me.  It's not mine; it's yours.  Give the word, and I'll sell off 
every morsel.  If I could have hoped it would have brought in 
nearly the sum wanted, I'd have sold all long ago.  Don't believe 
that I'll leave you or yours in the lurch, Mat.  I'd sell myself 
first.  I only wish," says the trooper, giving himself a 
disparaging blow in the chest, "that I knew of any one who'd buy 
such a second-hand piece of old stores."

"Old girl," murmurs Mr. Bagnet, "give him another bit of my mind."

"George," says the old girl, "you are not so much to be blamed, on 
full consideration, except for ever taking this business without 
the means."

"And that was like me!" observes the penitent trooper, shaking his 
head.  "Like me, I know."

"Silence!  The old girl," says Mr. Bagnet, "is correct--in her way 
of giving my opinions--hear me out!"

"That was when you never ought to have asked for the security, 
George, and when you never ought to have got it, all things 
considered.  But what's done can't be undone.  You are always an 
honourable and straightforward fellow, as far as lays in your 
power, though a little flighty.  On the other hand, you can't admit 
but what it's natural in us to be anxious with such a thing hanging 
over our heads.  So forget and forgive all round, George.  Come!  
Forget and forgive all round!"

Mrs. Bagnet, giving him one of her honest hands and giving her 
husband the other, Mr. George gives each of them one of his and 
holds them while he speaks.

"I do assure you both, there's nothing I wouldn't do to discharge 
this obligation.  But whatever I have been able to scrape together 
has gone every two months in keeping it up.  We have lived plainly 
enough here, Phil and I.  But the gallery don't quite do what was 
expected of it, and it's not--in short, it's not the mint.  It was 
wrong in me to take it?  Well, so it was.  But I was in a manner 
drawn into that step, and I thought it might steady me, and set me 
up, and you'll try to overlook my having such expectations, and 
upon my soul, I am very much obliged to you, and very much ashamed 
of myself."  With these concluding words, Mr. George gives a shake 
to each of the hands he holds, and relinquishing them, backs a pace 
or two in a broad-chested, upright attitude, as if he had made a 
final confession and were immediately going to be shot with all 
military honours.

"George, hear me out!" says Mr. Bagnet, glancing at his wife.  "Old 
girl, go on!"

Mr. Bagnet, being in this singular manner heard out, has merely to 
observe that the letter must be attended to without any delay, that 
it is advisable that George and he should immediately wait on Mr. 
Smallweed in person, and that the primary object is to save and 
hold harmless Mr. Bagnet, who had none of the money.  Mr. George, 
entirely assenting, puts on his hat and prepares to march with Mr. 
Bagnet to the enemy's camp.

"Don't you mind a woman's hasty word, George," says Mrs. Bagnet, 
patting him on the shoulder.  "I trust my old Lignum to you, and I 
am sure you'll bring him through it."

The trooper returns that this is kindly said and that he WILL bring 
Lignum through it somehow.  Upon which Mrs. Bagnet, with her cloak, 
basket, and umbrella, goes home, bright-eyed again, to the rest of 
her family, and the comrades sally forth on the hopeful errand of 
mollifying Mr. Smallweed.

Whether there are two people in England less likely to come 
satisfactorily out of any negotiation with Mr. Smallweed than Mr. 
George and Mr. Matthew Bagnet may be very reasonably questioned.  
Also, notwithstanding their martial appearance, broad square 
shoulders, and heavy tread, whether there are within the same 
limits two more simple and unaccustomed children in all the 
Smallweedy affairs of life.  As they proceed with great gravity 
through the streets towards the region of Mount Pleasant, Mr. 
Bagnet, observing his companion to be thoughtful, considers it a 
friendly part to refer to Mrs. Bagnet's late sally.

"George, you know the old girl--she's as sweet and as mild as milk.  
But touch her on the children--or myself--and she's off like 
gunpowder."

"It does her credit, Mat!"

"George," says Mr. Bagnet, looking straight before him, "the old 
girl--can't do anything--that don't do her credit.  More or less.  
I never say so.  Discipline must he maintained."

"She's worth her weight in gold," says the trooper.

"In gold?" says Mr. Bagnet.  "I'll tell you what.  The old girl's 
weight--is twelve stone six.  Would I take that weight--in any 
metal--for the old girl?  No.  Why not?  Because the old girl's 
metal is far more precious---than the preciousest metal.  And she's 
ALL metal!"

"You are right, Mat!"

"When she took me--and accepted of the ring--she 'listed under me 
and the children--heart and head, for life.  She's that earnest," 
says Mr. Bagnet, "and true to her colours--that, touch us with a 
finger--and she turns out--and stands to her arms.  If the old girl 
fires wide--once in a way--at the call of duty--look over it, 
George.  For she's loyal!"

"Why, bless her, Mat," returns the trooper, "I think the higher of 
her for it!"

"You are right!" says Mr. Bagnet with the warmest enthusiasm, 
though without relaxing the rigidity of a single muscle.  "Think as 
high of the old girl--as the rock of Gibraltar--and still you'll be 
thinking low--of such merits.  But I never own to it before her.  
Discipline must be maintained."

These encomiums bring them to Mount Pleasant and to Grandfather 
Smallweed's house.  The door is opened by the perennial Judy, who, 
having surveyed them from top to toe with no particular favour, but 
indeed with a malignant sneer, leaves them standing there while she 
consults the oracle as to their admission.  The oracle may be 
inferred to give consent from the circumstance of her returning 
with the words on her honey lips that they can come in if they want 
to it.  Thus privileged, they come in and find Mr. Smallweed with 
his feet in the drawer of his chair as if it were a paper foot-bath 
and Mrs. Smallweed obscured with the cushion like a bird that is 
not to sing.

"My dear friend," says Grandfather Smallweed with those two lean 
affectionate arms of his stretched forth.  "How de do?  How de do?  
Who is our friend, my dear friend?"

"Why this," returns George, not able to be very conciliatory at 
first, "is Matthew Bagnet, who has obliged me in that matter of 
ours, you know."

"Oh! Mr. Bagnet?  Surely!"  The old man looks at him under his 
hand.

"Hope you're well, Mr. Bagnet?  Fine man, Mr. George!  Military 
air, sir!"

No chairs being offered, Mr. George brings one forward for Bagnet 
and one for himself.  They sit down, Mr. Bagnet as if he had no 
power of bending himself, except at the hips, for that purpose.

"Judy," says Mr. Smallweed, "bring the pipe."

"Why, I don't know," Mr. George interposes, "that the young woman 
need give herself that trouble, for to tell you the truth, I am not 
inclined to smoke it to-day."

"Ain't you?" returns the old man.  "Judy, bring the pipe."

"The fact is, Mr. Smallweed," proceeds George, "that I find myself 
in rather an unpleasant state of mind.  It appears to me, sir, that 
your friend in the city has been playing tricks."

"Oh, dear no!" says Grandfather Smallweed.  "He never does that!"

"Don't he?  Well, I am glad to hear it, because I thought it might 
be HIS doing.  This, you know, I am speaking of.  This letter."

Grandfather Smallweed smiles in a very ugly way in recognition of 
the letter.

"What does it mean?" asks Mr. George.

"Judy," says the old man.  "Have you got the pipe?  Give it to me.  
Did you say what does it mean, my good friend?"

"Aye!  Now, come, come, you know, Mr. Smallweed," urges the 
trooper, constraining himself to speak as smoothly and 
confidentially as he can, holding the open letter in one hand and 
resting the broad knuckles of the other on his thigh, "a good lot 
of money has passed between us, and we are face to face at the 
present moment, and are both well aware of the understanding there 
has always been.  I am prepared to do the usual thing which I have 
done regularly and to keep this matter going.  I never got a letter 
like this from you before, and I have been a little put about by it 
this morning, because here's my friend Matthew Bagnet, who, you 
know, had none of the money--"

"I DON'T know it, you know," says the old man quietly.

"Why, con-found you--it, I mean--I tell you so, don't I?"

"Oh, yes, you tell me so," returns Grandfather Smallweed.  "But I 
don't know it."

"Well!" says the trooper, swallowing his fire.  "I know it."

Mr. Smallweed replies with excellent temper, "Ah!  That's quite 
another thing!"  And adds, "But it don't matter.  Mr. Bagnet's 
situation is all one, whether or no."

The unfortunate George makes a great effort to arrange the affair 
comfortably and to propitiate Mr. Smallweed by taking him upon his 
own terms.

"That's just what I mean.  As you say, Mr. Smallweed, here's 
Matthew Bagnet liable to be fixed whether or no.  Now, you see, 
that makes his good lady very uneasy in her mind, and me too, for 
whereas I'm a harurn-scarum sort of a good-for-nought that more 
kicks than halfpence come natural to, why he's a steady family man, 
don't you see?  Now, Mr. Smallweed," says the trooper, gaining 
confidence as he proceeds in his soldierly mode of doing business, 
"although you and I are good friends enough in a certain sort of a 
way, I am well aware that I can't ask you to let my friend Bagnet 
off entirely."

"Oh, dear, you are too modest.  You can ASK me anything, Mr. 
George."  (There is an ogreish kind of jocularity in Grandfather 
Smallweed to-day.)

"And you can refuse, you mean, eh?  Or not you so much, perhaps, as 
your friend in the city?  Ha ha ha!"

"Ha ha ha!" echoes Grandfather Smallweed.  In such a very hard 
manner and with eyes so particularly green that Mr. Bagnet's 
natural gravity is much deepened by the contemplation of that 
venerable man.

"Come!" says the sanguine George.  "I am glad to find we can be 
pleasant, because I want to arrange this pleasantly.  Here's my 
friend Bagnet, and here am I.  We'll settle the matter on the spot, 
if you please, Mr. Smallweed, in the usual way.  And you'll ease my 
friend Bagnet's mind, and his family's mind, a good deal if you'll 
just mention to him what our understanding is."

Here some shrill spectre cries out in a mocking manner, "Oh, good 
gracious!  Oh!"  Unless, indeed, it be the sportive Judy, who is 
found to be silent when the startled visitors look round, but whose 
chin has received a recent toss, expressive of derision and 
contempt.  Mr. Bagnet's gravity becomes yet more profound.

"But I think you asked me, Mr. George"--old Smallweed, who all this 
time has had the pipe in his hand, is the speaker now--"I think you 
asked me, what did the letter mean?"

"Why, yes, I did," returns the trooper in his off-hand way, "but I 
don't care to know particularly, if it's all correct and pleasant."

Mr. Smallweed, purposely balking himself in an aim at the trooper's 
head, throws the pipe on the ground and breaks it to pieces.

"That's what it means, my dear friend.  I'll smash you.  I'll 
crumble you.  I'll powder you.  Go to the devil!"

The two friends rise and look at one another.  Mr. Bagnet's gravity 
has now attained its profoundest point.

"Go to the devil!" repeats the old man.  "I'll have no more of your 
pipe-smokings and swaggerings.  What?  You're an independent 
dragoon, too!  Go to my lawyer (you remember where; you have been 
there before) and show your independeuce now, will you?  Come, my 
dear friend, there's a chance for you.  Open the street door, Judy; 
put these blusterers out!  Call in help if they don't go.  Put 'em 
out!"

He vociferates this so loudly that Mr. Bagnet, laying his hands on 
the shoulders of his comrade before the latter can recover from his 
amazement, gets him on the outside of the street door, which is 
instantly slammed by the triumphant Judy.  Utterly confounded, Mr. 
George awhile stands looking at the knocker.  Mr. Bagnet, in a 
perfect abyss of gravity, walks up and down before the little 
parlour window like a sentry and looks in every time he passes, 
apparently revolving something in his mind.

"Come, Mat," says Mr. George when he has recovered himself, "we 
must try the lawyer.  Now, what do you think of this rascal?"

Mr. Bagnet, stopping to take a farewell look into the parlour, 
replies with one shake of his head directed at the interior, "If my 
old girl had been here--I'd have told him!"  Having so discharged 
himself of the subject of his cogitations, he falls into step and 
marches off with the trooper, shoulder to shoulder.

When they present themselves in Lincoln's Inn Fields, Mr. 
Tulkinghorn is engaged and not to be seen.  He is not at all 
willing to see them, for when they have waited a full hour, and the 
clerk, on his bell being rung, takes the opportunity of mentioning 
as much, he brings forth no more encouraging message than that Mr. 
Tulkinghorn has nothing to say to them and they had better not 
wait.  They do wait, however, with the perseverance of military 
tactics, and at last the bell rings again and the client in 
possession comes out of Mr. Tulkinghorn's room.

The client is a handsome old lady, no other than Mrs. Rouncewell, 
housekeeper at Chesney Wold.  She comes out of the sanctuary with a 
fair old-fashioned curtsy and softly shuts the door.  She is 
treated with some distinction there, for the clerk steps out of his 
pew to show her through the outer office and to let her out.  The 
old lady is thanking him for his attention when she observes the 
comrades in waiting.

"I beg your pardon, sir, but I think those gentlemen are military?"

The clerk referring the question to them with his eye, and Mr. 
George not turning round from the almanac over the fire-place.  Mr. 
Bagnet takes upon himself to reply, "Yes, ma'am.  Formerly."

"I thought so.  I was sure of it.  My heart warms, gentlemen, at 
the sight of you.  It always does at the sight of such.  God bless 
you, gentlemen!  You'll excuse an old woman, but I had a son once 
who went for a soldier.  A fine handsome youth he was, and good in 
his bold way, though some people did disparage him to his poor 
mother.  I ask your pardon for troubling you, sir.  God bless you, 
gentlemen!"

"Same to you, ma'am!" returns Mr. Bagnet with right good will.

There is something very touching in the earnestness of the old 
lady's voice and in the tremble that goes through her quaint old 
figure.  But Mr. George is so occupied with the almanac over the 
fireplace (calculating the coming months by it perhaps) that he 
does not look round until she has gone away and the door is closed 
upon her.

"George," Mr. Bagnet gruffly whispers when he does turn from the 
almanac at last.  "Don't be cast down!  'Why, soldiers, why--should 
we be melancholy, boys?'  Cheer up, my hearty!"

The clerk having now again gone in to say that they are still there 
and Mr. Tulkinghorn being heard to return with some irascibility, 
"Let 'em come in then!" they pass into the great room with the 
painted ceiling and find him standing before the fire.

"Now, you men, what do you want?  Sergeant, I told you the last 
time I saw you that I don't desire your company here."

Sergeant replies--dashed within the last few minutes as to his 
usual manner of speech, and even as to his usual carriage--that he 
has received this letter, has been to Mr. Smallweed about it, and 
has been referred there.

"I have nothing to say to you," rejoins Mr. Tulkinghorn.  "If you 
get into debt, you must pay your debts or take the consequences.  
You have no occasion to come here to learn that, I suppose?"

Sergeant is sorry to say that he is not prepared with the money.

"Very well!  Then the other man--this man, if this is he--must pay 
it for you."

Sergeant is sorry to add that the other man is not prepared with 
the money either.

"Very well!  Then you must pay it between you or you must both be 
sued for it and both suffer.  You have had the money and must 
refund it.  You are not to pocket other people's pounds, shillings, 
and pence and escape scot-free."

The lawyer sits down in his easy-chair and stirs the fire.  Mr. 
George hopes he will have the goodness to--

"I tell you, sergeant, I have nothing to say to you.  I don't like 
your associates and don't want you here.  This matter is not at all 
in my course of practice and is not in my office.  Mr. Smallweed is 
good enough to offer these affairs to me, but they are not in my 
way.  You must go to Melchisedech's in Clifford's Inn."

"I must make an apology to you, sir," says Mr. George, "for 
pressing myself upon you with so little encouragement--which is 
almost as unpleasant to me as it can be to you--but would you let 
me say a private word to you?"

Mr. Tulkinghorn rises with his hands in his pockets and walks into 
one of the window recesses.  "Now!  I have no time to waste."  In 
the midst of his perfect assumption of indifference, he directs a 
sharp look at the trooper, taking care to stand with his own back 
to the light and to have the other with his face towards it.

"Well, sir," says Mr. George, "this man with me is the other party 
implicated in this unfortunate affair--nominally, only nominally--
and my sole object is to prevent his getting into trouble on my 
account.  He is a most respectable man with a wife and family, 
formerly in the Royal Artillery--"

"My friend, I don't care a pinch of snuff for the whole Royal 
Artillery establishment--officers, men, tumbrils, waggons, horses, 
guns, and ammunition."

"'Tis likely, sir.  But I care a good deal for Bagnet and his wife 
and family being injured on my account.  And if I could bring them 
through this matter, I should have no help for it but to give up 
without any other consideration what you wanted of me the other 
day."

"Have you got it here?"

"I have got it here, sir."

"Sergeant," the lawyer proceeds in his dry passionless manner, far 
more hopeless in the dealing with than any amount of vehemence, 
"make up your mind while I speak to you, for this is final.  After 
I have finished speaking I have closed the subject, and I won't re-
open it.  Understand that.  You can leave here, for a few days, 
what you say you have brought here if you choose; you can take it 
away at once if you choose.  In case you choose to leave it here, I 
can do this for you--I can replace this matter on its old footing, 
and I can go so far besides as to give you a written undertaking 
that this man Bagnet shall never be troubled in any way until you 
have been proceeded against to the utmost, that your means shall be 
exhausted before the creditor looks to his.  This is in fact all 
but freeing him.  Have you decided?"

The trooper puts his hand into his breast and answers with a long 
breath, "I must do it, sir."

So Mr. Tulkinghorn, putting on his spectacles, sits down and writes 
the undertaking, which he slowly reads and explains to Bagnet, who 
has all this time been staring at the ceiling and who puts his hand 
on his bald head again, under this new verbal shower-bath, and 
seems exceedingly in need of the old girl through whom to express 
his sentiments.  The trooper then takes from his breast-pocket a 
folded paper, which he lays with an unwilling hand at the lawyer's 
elbow.  "'Tis ouly a letter of instructions, sir.  The last I ever 
had from him."

Look at a millstone, Mr. George, for some change in its expression, 
and you will find it quite as soon as in the face of Mr. 
Tulkinghorn when he opens and reads the letter!  He refolds it and 
lays it in his desk with a countenance as unperturbable as death.

Nor has he anything more to say or do but to nod once in the same 
frigid and discourteous manner and to say briefly, "You can go.  
Show these men out, there!"  Being shown out, they repair to Mr. 
Bagnet's residence to dine.

Boiled beef and greens constitute the day's variety on the former 
repast of boiled pork and greens, and Mrs. Bagnet serves out the 
meal in the same way and seasons it with the best of temper, being 
that rare sort of old girl that she receives Good to her arms 
without a hint that it might be Better and catches light from any 
little spot of darkness near her.  The spot on this occasion is the 
darkened brow of Mr. George; he is unusually thoughtful and 
depressed.  At first Mrs. Bagnet trusts to the combined endearments 
of Quebec and Malta to restore him, but finding those young ladies 
sensible that their existing Bluffy is not the Bluffy of their 
usual frolicsome acquaintance, she winks off the light infantry and 
leaves him to deploy at leisure on the open ground of the domestic 
hearth.

But he does not.  He remains in close order, clouded and depressed.  
During the lengthy cleaning up and pattening process, when he and 
Mr. Bagnet are supplied with their pipes, he is no better than he 
was at dinner.  He forgets to smoke, looks at the fire and ponders, 
lets his pipe out, fills the breast of Mr. Bagnet with perturbation 
and dismay by showing that he has no enjoyment of tobacco.

Therefore when Mrs. Bagnet at last appears, rosy from the 
invigorating pail, and sits down to her work, Mr. Bagnet growls, 
"Old girl!" and winks monitions to her to find out what's the 
matter.

"Why, George!" says Mrs. Bagnet, quietly threading her needle.  
"How low you are!"

"Am I?  Not good company?  Well, I am afraid I am not."

"He ain't at all like Blulfy, mother!" cries little Malta.

"Because he ain't well, I think, mother," adds Quebec.

"Sure that's a bad sign not to be like Bluffy, too!" returns the 
trooper, kissing the young damsels.  "But it's true," with a sigh, 
"true, I am afraid.  These little ones are always right!"

"George," says Mrs. Bagnet, working busily, "if I thought you cross 
enough to think of anything that a shrill old soldier's wife--who 
could have bitten her tongue off afterwards and ought to have done 
it almost--said this morning, I don't know what I shouldn't say to 
you now."

"My kind soul of a darling," returns the trooper.  "Not a morsel of 
it."

"Because really and truly, George, what I said and meant to say was 
that I trusted Lignum to you and was sure you'd bring him through 
it.  And you HAVE brought him through it, noble!"

"Thankee, my dear!" says George.  "I am glad of your good opinion."

In giving Mrs. Bagnet's hand, with her work in it, a friendly 
shake--for she took her seat beside him--the trooper's attention is 
attracted to her face.  After looking at it for a little while as 
she plies her needle, he looks to young Woolwich, sitting on his 
stool in the corner, and beckons that fifer to him.

"See there, my boy," says George, very gently smoothing the 
mother's hair with his hand, "there's a good loving forehead for 
you!  All bright with love of you, my boy.  A little touched by the 
sun and the weather through following your father about and taking 
care of you, but as fresh and wholesome as a ripe apple on a tree."

Mr. Bagnet's face expresses, so far as in its wooden material lies, 
the highest approbation and acquiescence.

"The time will come, my boy," pursues the trooper, "when this hair 
of your mother's will be grey, and this forehead all crossed and 
re-crossed with wrinkles, and a fine old lady she'll be then.  Take 
care, while you are young, that you can think in those days, 'I 
never whitened a hair of her dear head--I never marked a sorrowful 
line in her face!'  For of all the many things that you can think 
of when you are a man, you had better have THAT by you, Woolwich!"

Mr. George concludes by rising from his chair, seating the boy 
beside his mother in it, and saying, with something of a hurry 
about him, that he'll smoke his pipe in the street a bit.



CHAPTER XXXV

Esther's Narrative


I lay ill through several weeks, and the usual tenor of my life 
became like an old remembrance.  But this was not the effect of 
time so much as of the change in all my habits made by the 
helplessness and inaction of a sick-room.  Before I had been 
confined to it many days, everything else seemed to have retired 
into a remote distance where there was little or no separation 
between the various stages of my life which had been really divided 
by years.  In falling ill, I seemed to have crossed a dark lake and 
to have left all my experiences, mingled together by the great 
distance, on the healthy shore.

My housekeeping duties, though at first it caused me great anxiety 
to think that they were unperformed, were soon as far off as the 
oldest of the old duties at Greenleaf or the summer afternoons when 
I went home from school with my portfolio under my arm, and my 
childish shadow at my side, to my godmother's house.  I had never 
known before how short life really was and into how small a space 
the mind could put it.

While I was very ill, the way in which these divisions of time 
became confused with one another distressed my mind exceedingly.  
At once a child, an elder girl, and the little woman I had been so 
happy as, I was not only oppressed by cares and difficulties 
adapted to each station, but by the great perplexity of endlessly 
trying to reconcile them.  I suppose that few who have not been in 
such a condition can quite understand what I mean or what painful 
unrest arose from this source.

For the same reason I am almost afraid to hint at that time in my 
disorder--it seemed one long night, but I believe there were both 
nights and days in it--when I laboured up colossal staircases, ever 
striving to reach the top, and ever turned, as I have seen a worm 
in a garden path, by some obstruction, and labouring again.  I knew 
perfectly at intervals, and I think vaguely at most times, that I 
was in my bed; and I talked with Charley, and felt her touch, and 
knew her very well; yet I would find myself complaining, "Oh, more 
of these never-ending stairs, Charley--more and more--piled up to 
the sky', I think!" and labouring on again.

Dare I hint at that worse time when, strung together somewhere in 
great black space, there was a flaming necklace, or ring, or starry 
circle of some kind, of which I was one of the beads!  And when my 
only prayer was to be taken off from the rest and when it was such 
inexplicable agony and misery to be a part of the dreadful thing?

Perhaps the less I say of these sick experiences, the less tedious 
and the more intelligible I shall be.  I do not recall them to make 
others unhappy or because I am now the least unhappy in remembering 
them.  It may be that if we knew more of such strange afflictions 
we might be the better able to alleviate their intensity.

The repose that succeeded, the long delicious sleep, the blissful 
rest, when in my weakness I was too calm to have any care for 
myself and could have heard (or so I think now) that I was dying, 
with no other emotion than with a pitying love for those I left 
behind--this state can be perhaps more widely understood.  I was in 
this state when I first shrunk from the light as it twinkled on me 
once more, and knew with a boundless joy for which no words are 
rapturous enough that I should see again.

I had heard my Ada crying at the door, day and night; I had heard 
her calling to me that I was cruel and did not love her; I had 
heard her praying and imploring to be let in to nurse and comfort 
me and to leave my bedside no more; but I had only said, when I 
could speak, "Never, my sweet girl, never!" and I had over and over 
again reminded Charley that she was to keep my darling from the 
room whether I lived or died.  Charley had been true to me in that 
time of need, and with her little hand and her great heart had kept 
the door fast.

But now, my sight strengthening and the glorious light coming every 
day more fully and brightly on me, I could read the letters that my 
dear wrote to me every morning and evening and could put them to my 
lips and lay my cheek upon them with no fear of hurting her.  I 
could see my little maid, so tender and so careful, going about the 
two rooms setting everything in order and speaking cheerfully to 
Ada from the open window again.  I could understand the stillness 
in the house and the thoughtfulness it expressed on the part of all 
those who had always been so good to me.  I could weep in the 
exquisite felicity of my heart and be as happy in my weakness as 
ever I had been in my strength.

By and by my strength began to be restored.  Instead of lying, with 
so strange a calmness, watching what was done for me, as if it were 
done for some one else whom I was quietly sorry for, I helped it a 
little, and so on to a little more and much more, until I became 
useful to myself, and interested, and attached to life again.

How well I remember the pleasant afternoon when I was raised in bed 
with pillows for the first time to enjoy a great tea-drinking with 
Charley!  The little creature--sent into the world, surely, to 
minister to the weak and sick--was so happy, and so busy, and 
stopped so often in her preparations to lay her head upon my bosom, 
and fondle me, and cry with joyful tears she was so glad, she was 
so glad, that I was obliged to say, "Charley, if you go on in this 
way, I must lie down again, my darling, for I am weaker than I 
thought I was!"  So Charley became as quiet as a mouse and took her 
bright face here and there across and across the two rooms, out of 
the shade into the divine sunshine, and out of the sunshine into 
the shade, while I watched her peacefully.  When all her 
preparations were concluded and the pretty tea-table with its 
little delicacies to tempt me, and its white cloth, and its 
flowers, and everything so lovingly and beautifully arranged for me 
by Ada downstairs, was ready at the bedside, I felt sure I was 
steady enough to say something to Charley that was not new to my 
thoughts.

First I complimented Charley on the room, and indeed it was so 
fresh and airy, so spotless and neat, that I could scarce believe I 
had been lying there so long.  This delighted Charley, and her face 
was brighter than before.

"Yet, Charley," said I, looking round, "I miss something, surely, 
that I am accustomed to?"

Poor little Charley looked round too and pretended to shake her 
head as if there were nothing absent.

"Are the pictures all as they used to be?" I asked her.

"Every one of them, miss," said Charley.

"And the furniture, Charley?"

"Except where I have moved it about to make more room, miss."

"And yet," said I, "I miss some familiar object.  Ah, I know what 
it is, Charley!  It's the looking-glass."

Charley got up from the table, making as if she had forgotten 
something, and went into the next room; and I heard her sob there.

I had thought of this very often.  I was now certain of it.  I 
could thank God that it was not a shock to me now.  I called 
Charley back, and when she came--at first pretending to smile, but 
as she drew nearer to me, looking grieved--I took her in my arms 
and said, "It matters very little, Charley.  I hope I can do 
without my old face very well."

I was presently so far advanced as to be able to sit up in a great 
chair and even giddily to walk into the adjoining room, leaning on 
Charley.  The mirror was gone from its usual place in that room 
too, but what I had to bear was none the harder to bear for that.

My guardian had throughout been earnest to visit me, and there was 
now no good reason why I should deny myself that happiness.  He 
came one morning, and when he first came in, could only hold me in 
his embrace and say, "My dear, dear girl!"  I had long known--who 
could know better?--what a deep fountain of affection and 
generosity his heart was; and was it not worth my trivial suffering 
and change to fill such a place in it?  "Oh, yes!" I thought.  "He 
has seen me, and he loves me better than he did; he has seen me and 
is even fonder of me than he was before; and what have I to mourn 
for!"

He sat down by me on the sofa, supporting me with his arm.  For a 
little while he sat with his hand over his face, but when he 
removed it, fell into his usual manner.  There never can have been, 
there never can be, a pleasanter manner.

"My little woman," said he, "what a sad time this has been.  Such 
an inflexible little woman, too, through all!"

"Only for the best, guardian," said I.

"For the best?" he repeated tenderly.  "Of course, for the best.  
But here have Ada and I been perfectly forlorn and miserable; here 
has your friend Caddy been coming and going late and early; here 
has every one about the house been utterly lost and dejected; here 
has even poor Rick been writing--to ME too--in his anxiety for 
you!"

I had read of Caddy in Ada's letters, but not of Richard.  I told 
him so.

"Why, no, my dear," he replied.  "I have thought it better not to 
mention it to her."

"And you speak of his writing to YOU," said I, repeating his 
emphasis.  "As if it were not natural for him to do so, guardian; 
as if he could write to a better friend!"

"He thinks he could, my love," returned my guardian, "and to many a 
better.  The truth is, he wrote to me under a sort of protest while 
unable to write to you with any hope of an answer--wrote coldly, 
haughtily, distantly, resentfully.  Well, dearest little woman, we 
must look forbearingly on it.  He is not to blame.  Jarndyce and 
Jarndyce has warped him out of himself and perverted me in his 
eyes.  I have known it do as bad deeds, and worse, many a time.  If 
two angels could be concerned in it, I believe it would change 
their nature."

"It has not changed yours, guardian."

"Oh, yes, it has, my dear," he said laughingly.  "It has made the 
south wind easterly, I don't know how often.  Rick mistrusts and 
suspects me--goes to lawyers, and is taught to mistrust and suspect 
me.  Hears I have conflicting interests, claims clashing against 
his and what not.  Whereas, heaven knows that if I could get out of 
the mountains of wiglomeration on which my unfortunate name has 
been so long bestowed (which I can't) or could level them by the 
extinction of my own original right (which I can't either, and no 
human power ever can, anyhow, I believe, to such a pass have we 
got), I would do it this hour.  I would rather restore to poor Rick 
his proper nature than be endowed with all the money that dead 
suitors, broken, heart and soul, upon the wheel of Chancery, have 
left unclaimed with the Accountant-General--and that's money 
enough, my dear, to be cast into a pyramid, in memory of Chancery's 
transcendent wickedness."

"IS it possible, guardian," I asked, amazed, "that Richard can be 
suspicious of you?"

"Ah, my love, my love," he said, "it is in the subtle poison of 
such abuses to breed such diseases.  His blood is infected, and 
objects lose their natural aspects in his sight.  It is not HIS 
fault."

"But it is a terrible misfortune, guardian."

"It is a terrible misfortune, little woman, to be ever drawn within 
the influences of Jarndyce and Jarndyce.  I know none greater.  By 
little and little he has been induced to trust in that rotten reed, 
and it communicates some portion of its rottenness to everything 
around him.  But again I say with all my soul, we must be patient 
with poor Rick and not blame him.  What a troop of fine fresh 
hearts like his have I seen in my time turned by the same means!"

I could not help expressing something of my wonder and regret that 
his benevolent, disinterested intentions had prospered so little.

"We must not say so, Dame Durden," he cheerfully rephed; "Ada is 
the happier, I hope, and that is much.  I did think that I and both 
these young creatures might be friends instead of distrustful foes 
and that we might so far counter-act the suit and prove too strong 
for it.  But it was too much to expect.  Jarndyce and Jarndyce was 
the curtain of Rick's cradle."

"But, guardian, may we not hope that a little experience will teach 
him what a false and wretched thing it is?"

"We WILL hope so, my Esther," said Mr. Jarndyce, "and that it may 
not teach him so too late.  In any case we must not be hard on him.  
There are not many grown and matured men living while we speak, 
good men too, who if they were thrown into this same court as 
suitors would not be vitally changed and depreciated within three 
years--within two--within one.  How can we stand amazed at poor 
Rick?  A young man so unfortunate," here he fell into a lower tone, 
as if he were thinking aloud, "cannot at first believe (who could?) 
that Chancery is what it is.  He looks to it, flushed and fitfully, 
to do something with his interests and bring them to some 
settlement.  It procrastinates, disappoints, tries, tortures him; 
wears out his sanguine hopes and patience, thread by thread; but he 
still looks to it, and hankers after it, and finds his whole world 
treacherous and hollow.  Well, well, well!  Enough of this, my 
dear!"

He had supported me, as at first, all this time, and his tenderness 
was so precious to me that I leaned my head upon his shoulder and 
loved him as if he had been my father.  I resolved in my own mind 
in this little pause, by some means, to see Richard when I grew 
strong and try to set him right.

"There are better subjects than these," said my guardian, "for such 
a joyful time as the time of our dear girl's recovery.  And I had a 
commission to broach one of them as soon as I should begin to talk.  
When shall Ada come to see you, my love?"

I had been thinking of that too.  A little in connexion with the 
absent mirrors, but not much, for I knew my loving girl would be 
changed by no change in my looks.

"Dear guardian," said I, "as I have shut her out so long--though 
indeed, indeed, she is like the light to me--"

"I know it well, Dame Durden, well."

He was so good, his touch expressed such endearing compassion and 
affection, and the tone of his voice carried such comfort into my 
heart that I stopped for a little while, quite unable to go on.  
"Yes, yes, you are tired," said he, "Rest a little."

"As I have kept Ada out so long," I began afresh after a short 
while, "I think I should like to have my own way a little longer, 
guardian.  It would be best to be away from here before I see her.  
If Charley and I were to go to some country lodging as soon as I 
can move, and if I had a week there in which to grow stronger and 
to be revived by the sweet air and to look forward to the happiness 
of having Ada with me again, I think it would be better for us."

I hope it was not a poor thing in me to wish to be a little more 
used to my altered self before I met the eyes of the dear girl I 
longed so ardently to see, but it is the truth.  I did.  He 
understood me, I was sure; but I was not afraid of that.  If it 
were a poor thing, I knew he would pass it over.

"Our spoilt little woman," said my guardian, "shall have her own 
way even in her inflexibility, though at the price, I know, of 
tears downstairs.  And see here!  Here is Boythorn, heart of 
chivalry, breathing such ferocious vows as never were breathed on 
paper before, that if you don't go and occupy his whole house, he 
having already turned out of it expressly for that purpose, by 
heaven and by earth he'll pull it down and not leave one brick 
standing on another!"

And my guardian put a letter in my hand, without any ordinary 
beginning such as "My dear Jarndyce," but rushing at once into the 
words, "I swear if Miss Summerson do not come down and take 
possession of my house, which I vacate for her this day at one 
o'clock, P.M.," and then with the utmost seriousness, and in the 
most emphatic terms, going on to make the extraordinary declaration 
he had quoted.  We did not appreciate the writer the less for 
laughing heartily over it, and we settled that I should send him a 
letter of thanks on the morrow and accept his offer.  It was a most 
agreeable one to me, for all the places I could have thought of, I 
should have liked to go to none so well as Chesney Wold.

"Now, little housewife," said my guardian, looking at his watch, "I 
was strictly timed before I came upstairs, for you must not be 
tired too soon; and my time has waned away to the last minute.  I 
have one other petition.  Little Miss Flite, hearing a rumour that 
you were ill, made nothing of walking down here--twenty miles, poor 
soul, in a pair of dancing shoes--to inquire.  It was heaven's 
mercy we were at home, or she would have walked back again."

The old conspiracy to make me happy!  Everybody seemed to be in it!

"Now, pet," said my guardian, "if it would not be irksome to you to 
admit the harmless little creature one afternoon before you save 
Boythorn's otherwise devoted house from demolition, I believe you 
would make her prouder and better pleased with herself than I--
though my eminent name is Jarndyce--could do in a lifetime."

I have no doubt he knew there would be something in the simple 
image of the poor afflicted creature that would fall like a gentle 
lesson on my mind at that time.  I felt it as he spoke to me.  I 
could not tell him heartily enough how ready I was to receive her.  
I had always pitied her, never so much as now.  I had always been 
glad of my little power to soothe her under her calamity, but 
never, never, half so glad before.

We arranged a time for Miss Flite to come out by the coach and 
share my early dinner.  When my guardian left me, I turned my face 
away upon my couch and prayed to be forgiven if I, surrounded by 
such blessings, had magnified to myself the little trial that I had 
to undergo.  The childish prayer of that old birthday when I had 
aspired to be industrious, contented, and true-hearted and to do 
good to some one and win some love to myself if I could came back 
into my mind with a reproachful sense of all the happiness I had 
since enjoyed and all the affectionate hearts that had been turned 
towards me.  If I were weak now, what had I profited by those 
mercies?  I repeated the old childish prayer in its old childish 
words and found that its old peace had not departed from it.

My guardian now came every day.  In a week or so more I could walk 
about our rooms and hold long talks with Ada from behind the 
window-curtain.  Yet I never saw her, for I had not as yet the 
courage to look at the dear face, though I could have done so 
easily without her seeing me.

On the appointed day Miss Flite arrived.  The poor little creature 
ran into my room quite forgetful of her usual dignity, and crying 
from her very heart of hearts, "My dear Fitz Jarndyce!" fell upon 
my neck and kissed me twenty times.

"Dear me!" said she, putting her hand into her reticule, "I have 
nothing here but documents, my dear Fitz Jarndyce; I must borrow a 
pocket handkerchief."

Charley gave her one, and the good creature certainly made use of 
it, for she held it to her eyes with both hands and sat so, 
shedding tears for the next ten minutes.

"With pleasure, my dear Fitz Jarndyce," she was careful to explain.  
"Not the least pain.  Pleasure to see you well again.  Pleasure at 
having the honour of being admitted to see you.  I am so much 
fonder of you, my love, than of the Chancellor.  Though I DO attend 
court regularly.  By the by, my dear, mentioning pocket 
handkerchiefs--"

Miss Flite here looked at Charley, who had been to meet her at the 
place where the coach stopped.  Charley glanced at me and looked 
unwilling to pursue the suggestion.

"Ve-ry right!" said Miss Flite, "Ve-ry correct.  Truly!  Highly 
indiscreet of me to mention it; but my dear Miss Fitz Jarndyce, I 
am afraid I am at times (between ourselves, you wouldn't think it) 
a little--rambling you know," said Miss Flite, touching her 
forehead.  "Nothing more,"

"What were you going to tell me?" said I, smiling, for I saw she 
wanted to go on.  "You have roused my curiosity, and now you must 
gratify it."

Miss Flite looked at Charley for advice in this important crisis, 
who said, "If you please, ma'am, you had better tell then," and 
therein gratified Miss Flite beyond measure.

"So sagacious, our young friend," said she to me in her mysterious 
way.  "Diminutive.  But ve-ry sagacious!  Well, my dear, it's a 
pretty anecdote.  Nothing more.  Still I think it charming.  Who 
should follow us down the road from the coach, my dear, but a poor 
person in a very ungenteel bonnet--"

"Jenny, if you please, miss," said Charley.

"Just so!" Miss Flite acquiesced with the greatest suavity.  
"Jenny.  Ye-es!  And what does she tell our young friend but that 
there has been a lady with a veil inquiring at her cottage after my 
dear Fitz Jarndyce's health and taking a handkerchief away with her 
as a little keepsake merely because it was my amiable Fitz 
Jarndyce's!  Now, you know, so very prepossessing in the lady with 
the veil!"

"If you please, miss," said Charley, to whom I looked in some 
astonishment, "Jenny says that when her baby died, you left a 
handkerchief there, and that she put it away and kept it with the 
baby's little things.  I think, if you please, partly because it 
was yours, miss, and partly because it had covered the baby."

"Diminutive," whispered Miss Flite, making a variety of motions 
about her own forehead to express intellect in Charley.  "But ex-
ceedingly sagacious!  And so dear!  My love, she's clearer than any 
counsel I ever heard!"

"Yes, Charley," I returned.  "I remember it.  Well?"

"Well, miss," said Charley, "and that's the handkerchief the lady 
took.  And Jenny wants you to know that she wouldn't have made away 
with it herself for a heap of money but that the lady took it and 
left some money instead.  Jenny don't know her at all, if you 
please, miss!"

"Why, who can she be?" said I.

"My love," Miss Flite suggested, advancing her lips to my ear with 
her most mysterious look, "in MY opinion--don't mention this to our 
diminutive friend--she's the Lord Chancellor's wife.  He's married, 
you know.  And I understand she leads him a terrible life.  Throws 
his lordship's papers into the fire, my dear, if he won't pay the 
jeweller!"

I did not think very much about this lady then, for I had an 
impression that it might be Caddy.  Besides, my attention was 
diverted by my visitor, who was cold after her ride and looked 
hungry and who, our dinner being brought in, required some little 
assistance in arraying herself with great satisfaction in a 
pitiable old scarf and a much-worn and often-mended pair of gloves, 
which she had brought down in a paper parcel.  I had to preside, 
too, over the entertainment, consisting of a dish of fish, a roast 
fowl, a sweetbread, vegetables, pudding, and Madeira; and it was so 
pleasant to see how she enjoyed it, and with what state and 
ceremony she did honour to it, that I was soon thinking of nothing 
else.

When we had finished and had our little dessert before us, 
embellished by the hands of my dear, who would yield the 
superintendence of everything prepared for me to no one, Miss Flite 
was so very chatty and happy that I thought I would lead her to her 
own history, as she was always pleased to talk about herself.  I 
began by saying "You have attended on the Lord Chancellor many 
years, Miss Flite?"

"Oh, many, many, many years, my dear.  But I expect a judgment.  
Shortly."

There was an anxiety even in her hopefulness that made me doubtful 
if I had done right in approaching the subject.  I thought I would 
say no more about it.

"My father expected a judgment," said Miss Flite.  "My brother.  My 
sister.  They all expected a judgment.  The same that I expect."

"They are all--"

"Ye-es.  Dead of course, my dear," said she.

As I saw she would go on, I thought it best to try to be 
serviceable to her by meeting the theme rather than avoiding it.

"Would it not be wiser," said I, "to expect this judgment no more?"

"Why, my dear," she answered promptly, "of course it would!"

"And to attend the court no more?"

"Equally of course," said she.  "Very wearing to be always in 
expectation of what never comes, my dear Fitz Jarndyce!  Wearing, I 
assure you, to the bone!"

She slightly showed me her arm, and it was fearfully thin indeed.

"But, my dear," she went on in her mysterious way, "there's a 
dreadful attraction in the place.  Hush!  Don't mention it to our 
diminutive friend when she comes in.  Or it may frighten her.  With 
good reason.  There's a cruel attraction in the place.  You CAN'T 
leave it.  And you MUST expect."

I tried to assure her that this was not so.  She heard me patiently 
and smilingly, but was ready with her own answer.

"Aye, aye, aye!  You think so because I am a little rambling.  Ve-
ry absurd, to be a little rambling, is it not?  Ve-ry confusing, 
too.  To the head.  I find it so.  But, my dear, I have been there 
many years, and I have noticed.  It's the mace and seal upon the 
table."

What could they do, did she think?  I mildly asked her.

"Draw," returned Miss Flite.  "Draw people on, my dear.  Draw peace 
out of them.  Sense out of them.  Good looks out of them.  Good 
qualities out of them.  I have felt them even drawing my rest away 
in the night.  Cold and glittering devils!"

She tapped me several times upon the arm and nodded good-humouredly 
as if she were anxious I should understand that I had no cause to 
fear her, though she spoke so gloomily, and confided these awful 
secrets to me.

"Let me see," said she.  "I'll tell you my own case.  Before they 
ever drew me--before I had ever seen them--what was it I used to 
do?  Tambourine playing?  No.  Tambour work.  I and my sister 
worked at tambour work.  Our father and our brother had a builder's 
business.  We all lived together.  Ve-ry respectably, my dear!  
First, our father was drawn--slowly.  Home was drawn with him.  In 
a few years he was a fierce, sour, angry bankrupt without a kind 
word or a kind look for any one.  He had been so different, Fitz 
Jarndyce.  He was drawn to a debtors' prison.  There he died.  Then 
our brother was drawn--swiftly--to drunkenness.  And rags.  And 
death.  Then my sister was drawn.  Hush!  Never ask to what!  Then 
I was ill and in misery, and heard, as I had often heard before, 
that this was all the work of Chancery.  When I got better, I went 
to look at the monster.  And then I found out how it was, and I was 
drawn to stay there."

Having got over her own short narrative, in the delivery of which 
she had spoken in a low, strained voice, as if the shock were fresh 
upon her, she gradually resumed her usual air of amiable 
importance.

"You don't quite credit me, my dear!  Well, well!  You will, some 
day.  I am a little rambling.  But I have noticed.  I have seen 
many new faces come, unsuspicious, within the influence of the mace 
and seal in these many years.  As my father's came there.  As my 
brother's.  As my sister's.  As my own.  I hear Conversation Kenge 
and the rest of them say to the new faces, 'Here's little Miss 
Flite.  Oh, you are new here; and you must come and be presented to 
little Miss Flite!'  Ve-ry good.  Proud I am sure to have the 
honour!  And we all laugh.  But, Fitz Jarndyce, I know what will 
happen.  I know, far better than they do, when the attraction has 
begun.  I know the signs, my dear.  I saw them begin in Gridley.  
And I saw them end.  Fitz Jarndyce, my love," speaking low again, 
"I saw them beginning in our friend the ward in Jarndyce.  Let some 
one hold him back.  Or he'll be drawn to ruin.

She looked at me in silence for some moments, with her face 
gradually softening into a smile.  Seeming to fear that she had 
been too gloomy, and seeming also to lose the connexion in her 
mind, she said politely as she sipped her glass of wine, "Yes, my 
dear, as I was saying, I expect a judgment shortly.  Then I shall 
release my birds, you know, and confer estates."

I was much impressed by her allusion to Richard and by the sad 
meaning, so sadly illustrated in her poor pinched form, that made 
its way through all her incoherence.  But happily for her, she was 
quite complacent again now and beamed with nods and smiles.

"But, my dear," she said, gaily, reaching another hand to put it 
upon mine.  "You have not congratulated me on my physician.  
Positively not once, yet!"

I was obliged to confess that I did not quite know what she meant.

"My physician, Mr. Woodcourt, my dear, who was so exceedingly 
attentive to me.  Though his services were rendered quite 
gratuitously.  Until the Day of Judgment.  I mean THE judgment that 
will dissolve the spell upon me of the mace and seal."

"Mr. Woodcourt is so far away, now," said I, "that I thought the 
time for such congratulation was past, Miss Flite."

"But, my child," she returned, "is it possible that you don't know 
what has happened?"

"No," said I.

"Not what everybody has been talking of, my beloved Fitz Jarndyce!"

"No," said I.  "You forget how long I have been here."

"True!  My dear, for the moment--true.  I blame myself.  But my 
memory has been drawn out of me, with everything else, by what I 
mentioned.  Ve-ry strong influence, is it not?  Well, my dear, 
there has been a terrible shipwreck over in those East Indian 
seas."

"Mr. Woodcourt shipwrecked!"

"Don't be agitated, my dear.  He is safe.  An awful scene.  Death 
in all shapes.  Hundreds of dead and dying.  Fire, storm, and 
darkness.  Numbers of the drowning thrown upon a rock.  There, and 
through it all, my dear physician was a hero.  Calm and brave 
through everything.  Saved many lives, never complained in hunger 
and thirst, wrapped naked people in his spare clothes, took the 
lead, showed them what to do, governed them, tended the sick, 
buried the dead, and brought the poor survivors safely off at last!  
My dear, the poor emaciated creatures all but worshipped him.  They 
fell down at his feet when they got to the land and blessed him.  
The whole country rings with it.  Stay!  Where's my bag of 
documents?  I have got it there, and you shall read it, you shall 
read it!"

And I DID read all the noble history, though very slowly and 
imperfectly then, for my eyes were so dimmed that I could not see 
the words, and I cried so much that I was many times obliged to lay 
down the long account she had cut out of the newspaper.  I felt so 
triumphant ever to have known the man who had done such generous 
and gallant deeds, I felt such glowing exultation in his renown, I 
so admired and loved what he had done, that I envied the storm-worn 
people who had fallen at his feet and blessed him as their 
preserver.  I could myself have kneeled down then, so far away, and 
blessed him in my rapture that he should be so truly good and 
brave.  I felt that no one--mother, sister, wife--could honour him 
more than I.  I did, indeed!

My poor little visitor made me a present of the account, and when 
as the evening began to close in she rose to take her leave, lest 
she should miss the coach by which she was to return, she was still 
full of the shipwreck, which I had not yet sufflciently composed 
myself to understand in all its details.

"My dear," said she as she carefully folded up her scarf and 
gloves, "my brave physician ought to have a title bestowed upon 
him.  And no doubt he will.  You are of that opinlon?"

That he well deserved one, yes.  That he would ever have one, no.

"Why not, Fitz Jarndyce?" she asked rather sharply.

I said it was not the custom in England to confer titles on men 
distinguished by peaceful services, however good and great, unless 
occasionally when they consisted of the accumulation of some very 
large amount of money.

"Why, good gracious," said Miss Flite, "how can you say that?  
Surely you know, my dear, that all the greatest ornaments of 
England in knowledge, imagination, active humanity, and improvement 
of every sort are added to its nobility!  Look round you, my dear, 
and consider.  YOU must be rambling a little now, I think, if you 
don't know that this is the great reason why titles will always 
last in the land!"

I am afraid she believed what she said, for there were moments when 
she was very mad indeed.

And now I must part with the little secret I have thus far tried to 
keep.  I had thought, sometimes, that Mr. Woodcourt loved me and 
that if he had been richer he would perhaps have told me that he 
loved me before he went away.  I had thought, sometimes, that if he 
had done so, I should have been glad of it.  But how much better it 
was now that this had never happened!  What should I have suffered 
if I had had to write to him and tell him that the poor face he had 
known as mine was quite gone from me and that I freely released him 
from his bondage to one whom he had never seen!

Oh, it was so much better as it was!  With a great pang mercifully 
spared me, I could take back to my heart my childish prayer to be 
all he had so brightly shown himself; and there was nothing to be 
undone: no chain for me to break or for him to drag; and I could 
go, please God, my lowly way along the path of duty, and he could 
go his nobler way upon its broader road; and though we were apart 
upon the journey, I might aspire to meet him, unselfishly, 
innocently, better far than he had thought me when I found some 
favour in his eyes, at the journey's end.



CHAPTER XXXVI

Chesney Wold


Charley and I did not set off alone upon our expedition into 
Lincolnshire.  My guardian had made up his mind not to lose sight 
of me until I was safe in Mr. Boythorn's house, so he accompanied 
us, and we were two days upon the road.  I found every breath of 
air, and every scent, and every flower and leaf and blade of grass, 
and every passing cloud, and everything in nature, more beautiful 
and wonderful to me than I had ever found it yet.  This was my 
first gain from my illness.  How little I had lost, when the wide 
world was so full of delight for me.

My guardian intending to go back immediately, we appointed, on our 
way down, a day when my dear girl should come.  I wrote her a 
letter, of which he took charge, and he left us within half an hour 
of our arrival at our destination, on a delightful evening in the 
early summer-time.

If a good fairy had built the house for me with a wave of her wand, 
and I had been a princess and her favoured god-child, I could not 
have been more considered in it.  So many preparations were made 
for me and such an endearing remembrance was shown of all my little 
tastes and likings that I could have sat down, overcome, a dozen 
times before I had revisited half the rooms.  I did better than 
that, however, by showing them all to Charley instead.  Charley's 
delight calmed mine; and after we had had a walk in the garden, and 
Charley had exhausted her whole vocabulary of admiring expressions, 
I was as tranquilly happy as I ought to have been.  It was a great 
comfort to be able to say to myself after tea, "Esther, my dear, I 
think you are quite sensible enough to sit down now and write a 
note of thanks to your host."  He had left a note of welcome for 
me, as sunny as his own face, and had confided his bird to my care, 
which I knew to be his highest mark of confidence.  Accordingly I 
wrote a little note to him in London, telling him how all his 
favourite plants and trees were looking, and how the most 
astonishing of birds had chirped the honours of the house to me in 
the most hospitable manner, and how, after singing on my shoulder, 
to the inconceivable rapture of my little maid, he was then at 
roost in the usual corner of his cage, but whether dreaming or no I 
could not report.  My note finished and sent off to the post, I 
made myself very busy in unpacking and arranging; and I sent 
Charley to bed in good time and told her I should want her no more 
that night.

For I had not yet looked in the glass and had never asked to have 
my own restored to me.  I knew this to be a weakness which must be 
overcome, but I had always said to myself that I would begin afresh 
when I got to where I now was.  Therefore I had wanted to be alone, 
and therefore I said, now alone, in my own room, "Esther, if you 
are to be happy, if you are to have any right to pray to be true-
hearted, you must keep your word, my dear."  I was quite resolved 
to keep it, but I sat down for a little while first to reflect upon 
all my blessings.  And then I said my prayers and thought a little 
more.

My hair had not been cut off, though it had been in danger more 
than once.  It was long and thick.  I let it down, and shook it 
out, and went up to the glass upon the dressing-table.  There was a 
little muslin curtain drawn across it.  I drew it back and stood 
for a moment looking through such a veil of my own hair that I 
could see nothing else.  Then I put my hair aside and looked at the 
reflection in the mirror, encouraged by seeing how placidly it 
looked at me.  I was very much changed--oh, very, very much.  At 
first my face was so strange to me that I think I should have put 
my hands before it and started back but for the encouragement I 
have mentioned.  Very soon it became more familiar, and then I knew 
the extent of the alteration in it better than I had done at first.  
It was not like what I had expected, but I had expected nothing 
definite, and I dare say anything definite would have surprised me.

I had never been a beauty and had never thought myself one, but I 
had been very different from this.  It was all gone now.  Heaven 
was so good to me that I could let it go with a few not bitter 
tears and could stand there arranging my hair for the night quite 
thankfully.

One thing troubled me, and I considered it for a long time before I 
went to sleep.  I had kept Mr. Woodcourt's flowers.  When they were 
withered I had dried them and put them in a book that I was fond 
of.  Nobody knew this, not even Ada.  I was doubtful whether I had 
a right to preserve what he had sent to one so different--whether 
it was generous towards him to do it.  I wished to be generous to 
him, even in the secret depths of my heart, which he would never 
know, because I could have loved him--could have been devoted to 
him.  At last I came to the conclusion that I might keep them if I 
treasured them only as a remembrance of what was irrevocably past 
and gone, never to be looked back on any more, in any other light.  
I hope this may not seem trivial.  I was very much in earnest.

I took care to be up early in the morning and to be before the 
glass when Charley came in on tiptoe.

"Dear, dear, miss!" cried Charley, starting.  "Is that you?"

"Yes, Charley," said I, quietly putting up my hair.  "And I am very 
well indeed, and very happy."

I saw it was a weight off Charley's mind, but it was a greater 
weight off mine.  I knew the worst now and was composed to it.  I 
shall not conceal, as I go on, the weaknesses I could not quite 
conquer, but they always passed from me soon and the happier frame 
of mind stayed by me faithfully.

Wishing to be fully re-established in my strength and my good 
spirits before Ada came, I now laid down a little series of plans 
with Charley for being in the fresh air all day long.  We were to 
be out before breakfast, and were to dine early, and were to be out 
again before and after dinner, and were to talk in the garden after 
tea, and were to go to rest betimes, and were to climb every hill 
and explore every road, lane, and field in the neighbourhood.  As 
to restoratives and strengthening delicacies, Mr. Boythorn's good 
housekeeper was for ever trotting about with something to eat or 
drink in her hand; I could not even be heard of as resting in the 
park but she would come trotting after me with a basket, her 
cheerful face shining with a lecture on the importance of frequent 
nourishment.  Then there was a pony expressly for my riding, a 
chubby pony with a short neck and a mane all over his eyes who 
could canter--when he would--so easily and quietly that he was a 
treasure.  In a very few days he would come to me in the paddock 
when I called him, and eat out of my hand, and follow me about.  We 
arrived at such a capital understanding that when he was jogging 
with me lazily, and rather obstinately, down some shady lane, if I 
patted his neck and said, "Stubbs, I am surprised you don't canter 
when you know how much I like it; and I think you might oblige me, 
for you are only getting stupid and going to sleep," he would give 
his head a comical shake or two and set off directly, while Charley 
would stand still and laugh with such enjoyment that her laughter 
was like music.  I don't know who had given Stubbs his name, but it 
seemed to belong to him as naturally as his rough coat.  Once we 
put him in a little chaise and drove him triumphantly through the 
green lanes for five miles; but all at once, as we were extolling 
him to the skies, he seemed to take it ill that he should have been 
accompanied so far by the circle of tantalizing little gnats that 
had been hovering round and round his ears the whole way without 
appearing to advance an inch, and stopped to think about it.  I 
suppose he came to the decision that it was not to be borne, for he 
steadily refused to move until I gave the reins to Charley and got 
out and walked, when he followed me with a sturdy sort of good 
humour, putting his head under my arm and rubbing his ear against 
my sleeve.  It was in vain for me to say, "Now, Stubbs, I feel 
quite sure from what I know of you that you will go on if I ride a 
little while," for the moment I left him, he stood stock still 
again.  Consequently I was obliged to lead the way, as before; and 
in this order we returned home, to the great delight of the 
village.

Charley and I had reason to call it the most friendly of villages, 
I am sure, for in a week's time the people were so glad to see us 
go by, though ever so frequently in the course of a day, that there 
were faces of greeting in every cottage.  I had known many of the 
grown people before and almost all the children, but now the very 
steeple began to wear a familiar and affectionate look.  Among my 
new friends was an old old woman who lived in such a little 
thatched and whitewashed dwelling that when the outside shutter was 
turned up on its hinges, it shut up the whole house-front.  This 
old lady had a grandson who was a sailor, and I wrote a letter to 
him for her and drew at the top of it the chimney-corner in which 
she had brought him up and where his old stool yet occupied its old 
place.  This was considered by the whole village the most wonderful 
achievement in the world, but when an answer came back all the way 
from Plymouth, in which he mentioned that he was going to take the 
picture all the way to America, and from America would write again, 
I got all the credit that ought to have been given to the post-
office and was invested with the merit of the whole system.

Thus, what with being so much in the air, playing with so many 
children, gossiping with so many people, sitting on invitation in 
so many cottages, going on with Charley's education, and writing 
long letters to Ada every day, I had scarcely any time to think 
about that little loss of mine and was almost always cheerful.  If 
I did think of it at odd moments now and then, I had only to be 
busy and forget it.  I felt it more than I had hoped I should once 
when a child said, "Mother, why is the lady not a pretty lady now 
like she used to be?"  But when I found the child was not less fond 
of me, and drew its soft hand over my face with a kind of pitying 
protection in its touch, that soon set me up again.  There were 
many little occurrences which suggested to me, with great 
consolation, how natural it is to gentle hearts to be considerate 
and delicate towards any inferiority.  One of these particularly 
touched me.  I happened to stroll into the little church when a 
marriage was just concluded, and the young couple had to sign the 
register.

The bridegroom, to whom the pen was handed first, made a rude cross 
for his mark; the bride, who came next, did the same.  Now, I had 
known the bride when I was last there, not only as the prettiest 
girl in the place, but as having quite distinguished herself in the 
school, and I could not help looking at her with some surprise.  
She came aside and whispered to me, while tears of honest love and 
admiration stood in her bright eyes, "He's a dear good fellow, 
miss; but he can't write yet--he's going to learn of me--and I 
wouldn't shame him for the world!"  Why, what had I to fear, I 
thought, when there was this nobility in the soul of a labouring 
man's daughter!

The air blew as freshly and revivingly upon me as it had ever 
blown, and the healthy colour came into my new face as it had come 
into my old one.  Charley was wonderful to see, she was so radiant 
and so rosy; and we both enjoyed the whole day and slept soundly 
the whole night.

There was a favourite spot of mine in the park-woods of Chesney 
Wold where a seat had been erected commanding a lovely view.  The 
wood had been cleared and opened to improve this point of sight, 
and the bright sunny landscape beyond was so beautiful that I 
rested there at least once every day.  A picturesque part of the 
Hall, called the Ghost's Walk, was seen to advantage from this 
higher ground; and the startling name, and the old legend in the 
Dedlock family which I had heard from Mr. Boythorn accounting for 
it, mingled with the view and gave it something of a mysterious 
interest in addition to its real charms.  There was a bank here, 
too, which was a famous one for violets; and as it was a daily 
delight of Charley's to gather wild flowers, she took as much to 
the spot as I did.

It would be idle to inquire now why I never went close to the house 
or never went inside it.  The family were not there, I had heard on 
my arrival, and were not expected.  I was far from being incurious 
or uninterested about the building; on the contrary, I often sat in 
this place wondering how the rooms ranged and whether any echo like 
a footstep really did resound at times, as the story said, upon the 
lonely Ghost's Walk.  The indefinable feeling with which Lady 
Dedlock had impressed me may have had some influence in keeping me 
from the house even when she was absent.  I am not sure.  Her face 
and figure were associated with it, naturally; but I cannot say 
that they repelled me from it, though something did.  For whatever 
reason or no reason, I had never once gone near it, down to the day 
at which my story now arrives.

I was resting at my favourite point after a long ramble, and 
Charley was gathering violets at a little distance from me.  I had 
been looking at the Ghost's Walk lying in a deep shade of masonry 
afar off and picturing to myself the female shape that was said to 
haunt it when I became aware of a figure approaching through the 
wood.  The perspective was so long and so darkened by leaves, and 
the shadows of the branches on the ground made it so much more 
intricate to the eye, that at first I could not discern what figure 
it was.  By little and little it revealed itself to be a woman's--a 
lady's--Lady Dedlock's.  She was alone and coming to where I sat 
with a much quicker step, I observed to my surprise, than was usual 
with her.

I was fluttered by her being unexpectedly so near (she was almost 
within speaking distance before I knew her) and would have risen to 
continue my walk.  But I could not.  I was rendered motionless.  
Not so much by her hurried gesture of entreaty, not so much by her 
quick advance and outstretched hands, not so much by the great 
change in her manner and the absence of her haughty self-restraint, 
as by a something in her face that I had pined for and dreamed of 
when I was a little child, something I had never seen in any face, 
something I had never seen in hers before.

A dread and faintness fell upon me, and I called to Charley.  Lady 
Dedlock stopped upon the instant and changed back almost to what I 
had known her.

"Miss Summerson, I am afraid I have startled you," she said, now 
advancing slowly.  "You can scarcely be strong yet.  You have been 
very ill, I know.  I have been much concerned to hear it."

I could no more have removed my eyes from her pale face than I 
could have stirred from the bench on which I sat.  She gave me her 
hand, and its deadly coldness, so at variance with the enforced 
composure of her features, deepened the fascination that 
overpowered me.  I cannot say what was in my whirling thoughts.

"You are recovering again?" she asked kindly.

"I was quite well but a moment ago, Lady Dedlock."

"Is this your young attendant?"

"Yes."

"Will you send her on before and walk towards your house with me?"

"Charley," said I, "take your flowers home, and I will follow you 
directly."

Charley, with her best curtsy, blushingly tied on her bonnet and 
went her way.  When she was gone, Lady Dedlock sat down on the seat 
beside me.

I cannot tell in any words what the state of my mind was when I saw 
in her hand my handkerchief with which I had covered the dead baby.

I looked at her, but I could not see her, I could not hear her, I 
could not draw my breath.  The beating of my heart was so violent 
and wild that I felt as if my life were breaking from me.  But when 
she caught me to her breast, kissed me, wept over me, 
compassionated me, and called me back to myself; when she fell down 
on her knees and cried to me, "Oh, my child, my child, I am your 
wicked and unhappy mother!  Oh, try to forgive me!"--when I saw her 
at my feet on the bare earth in her great agony of mind, I felt, 
through all my tumult of emotion, a burst of gratitude to the 
providence of God that I was so changed as that I never could 
disgrace her by any trace of likeness, as that nobody could ever 
now look at me and look at her and remotely think of any near tie 
between us.

I raised my mother up, praying and beseeching her not to stoop 
before me in such affliction and humiliation.  I did so in broken, 
incoherent words, for besides the trouble I was in, it frightened 
me to see her at MY feet.  I told her--or I tried to tell her--that 
if it were for me, her child, under any circumstances to take upon 
me to forgive her, I did it, and had done it, many, many years.  I 
told her that my heart overflowed with love for her, that it was 
natural love which nothing in the past had changed or could change.  
That it was not for me, then resting for the first time on my 
mother's bosom, to take her to account for having given me life, 
but that my duty was to bless her and receive her, though the whole 
world turned from her, and that I only asked her leave to do it.  I 
held my mother in my embrace, and she held me in hers, and among 
the still woods in the silence of the summer day there seemed to be 
nothing but our two troubled minds that was not at peace.

"To bless and receive me," groaned my mother, "it is far too late.  
I must travel my dark road alone, and it will lead me where it 
will.  From day to day, sometimes from hour to hour, I do not see 
the way before my guilty feet.  This is the earthly punishment I 
have brought upon myself.  I bear it, and I hide it."

Even in the thinking of her endurance, she drew her habitual air of 
proud indifference about her like a veil, though she soon cast it 
off again.

"I must keep this secret, if by any means it can be kept, not 
wholly for myself.  I have a husband, wretched and dishonouring 
creature that I am!"

These words she uttered with a suppressed cry of despair, more 
terrible in its sound than any shriek.  Covering her face with her 
hands, she shrank down in my embrace as if she were unwilling that 
I should touch her; nor could I, by my utmost persuasions or by any 
endearments I could use, prevail upon her to rise.  She said, no, 
no, no, she could only speak to me so; she must be proud and 
disdainful everywhere else; she would be humbled and ashamed there, 
in the only natural moments of her life.

My unhappy mother told me that in my illness she had been nearly 
frantic.  She had but then known that her child was living.  She 
could not have suspected me to be that child before.  She had 
followed me down here to speak to me but once in all her life.  We 
never could associate, never could communicate, never probably from 
that time forth could interchange another word on earth.  She put 
into my hands a letter she had written for my reading only and said 
when I had read it and destroyed it--but not so much for her sake, 
since she asked nothing, as for her husband's and my own--I must 
evermore consider her as dead.  If I could believe that she loved 
me, in this agony in which I saw her, with a mother's love, she 
asked me to do that, for then I might think of her with a greater 
pity, imagining what she suffered.  She had put herself beyond all 
hope and beyond all help.  Whether she preserved her secret until 
death or it came to be discovered and she brought dishonour and 
disgrace upon the name she had taken, it was her solitary struggle 
always; and no affection could come near her, and no human creature 
could render her any aid.

"But is the secret safe so far?" I asked.  "Is it safe now, dearest 
mother?"

"No," replied my mother.  "It has been very near discovery.  It was 
saved by an accident.  It may be lost by another accident--to-
morrow, any day."

"Do you dread a particular person?"

"Hush!  Do not tremble and cry so much for me.  I am not worthy of 
these tears," said my mother, kissing my hands.  "I dread one 
person very much."

"An enemy?"

"Not a friend.  One who is too passionless to be either.  He is Sir 
Leicester Dedlock's lawyer, mechanically faithful without 
attachment, and very jealous of the profit, privilege, and 
reputation of being master of the mysteries of great houses."

"Has he any suspicions?"

"Many."

"Not of you?" I said alarmed.

"Yes!  He is always vigilant and always near me.  I may keep him at 
a standstill, but I can never shake him off."

"Has he so little pity or compunction?"

"He has none, and no anger.  He is indifferent to everything but 
his calling.  His calling is the acquisition of secrets and the 
holding possession of such power as they give him, with no sharer 
or opponent in it."

"Could you trust in him?"

"I shall never try.  The dark road I have trodden for so many years 
will end where it will.  I follow it alone to the end, whatever the 
end be.  It may be near, it may be distant; while the road lasts, 
nothing turns me."

"Dear mother, are you so resolved?"

"I AM resolved.  I have long outbidden folly with folly, pride with 
pride, scorn with scorn, insolence with insolence, and have 
outlived many vanities with many more.  I will outlive this danger, 
and outdie it, if I can.  It has closed around me almost as awfully 
as if these woods of Chesney Wold had closed around the house, but 
my course through it is the same.  I have but one; I can have but 
one."

"Mr. Jarndyce--"  I was beginning when my mother hurriedly 
inquired, "Does HE suspect?"

"No," said I.  "No, indeed!  Be assured that he does not!"  And I 
told her what he had related to me as his knowledge of my story.  
"But he is so good and sensible," said I, "that perhaps if he knew--"

My mother, who until this time had made no change in her position, 
raised her hand up to my lips and stopped me.

"Confide fully in him," she said after a little while.  "You have 
my free consent--a small gift from such a mother to her injured 
child!- -but do not tell me of it.  Some pride is left in me even 
yet."

I explained, as nearly as I could then, or can recall now--for my 
agitation and distress throughout were so great that I scarcely 
understood myself, though every word that was uttered in the 
mother's voice, so unfamiliar and so melancholy to me, which in my 
childhood I had never learned to love and recognize, had never been 
sung to sleep with, had never heard a blessing from, had never had 
a hope inspired by, made an enduring impression on my memory--I say 
I explained, or tried to do it, how I had only hoped that Mr. 
Jarndyce, who had been the best of fathers to me, might be able to 
afford some counsel and support to her.  But my mother answered no, 
it was impossible; no one could help her.  Through the desert that 
lay before her, she must go alone.

"My child, my child!" she said.  "For the last time!  These kisses 
for the last time!  These arms upon my neck for the last time!  We 
shall meet no more.  To hope to do what I seek to do, I must be 
what I have been so long.  Such is my reward and doom.  If you hear 
of Lady Dedlock, brilliant, prosperous, and flattered, think of 
your wretched mother, conscience-stricken, underneath that mask!  
Think that the reality is in her suffering, in her useless remorse, 
in her murdering within her breast the only love and truth of which 
it is capable!  And then forgive her if you can, and cry to heaven 
to forgive her, which it never can!"

We held one another for a little space yet, but she was so firm 
that she took my hands away, and put them back against my breast, 
and with a last kiss as she held them there, released them, and 
went from me into the wood.  I was alone, and calm and quiet below 
me in the sun and shade lay the old house, with its terraces and 
turrets, on which there had seemed to me to be such complete repose 
when I first saw it, but which now looked like the obdurate and 
unpitying watcher of my mother's misery.

Stunned as I was, as weak and helpless at first as I had ever been 
in my sick chamber, the necessity of guarding against the danger of 
discovery, or even of the remotest suspicion, did me service.  I 
took such precautions as I could to hide from Charley that I had 
been crying, and I constrained myself to think of every sacred 
obligation that there was upon me to be careful and collected.  It 
was not a little while before I could succeed or could even 
restrain bursts of grief, but after an hour or so I was better and 
felt that I might return.  I went home very slowly and told 
Charley, whom I found at the gate looking for me, that I had been 
tempted to extend my walk after Lady Dedlock had left me and that I 
was over-tired and would lie down.  Safe in my own room, I read the 
letter.  I clearly derived from it--and that was much then--that I 
had not been abandoned by my mother.  Her elder and only sister, 
the godmother of my childhood, discovering signs of life in me when 
I had been laid aside as dead, had in her stern sense of duty, with 
no desire or willingness that I should live, reared me in rigid 
secrecy and had never again beheld my mother's face from within a 
few hours of my birth.  So strangely did I hold my place in this 
world that until within a short time back I had never, to my own 
mother's knowledge, breathed--had been buried--had never been 
endowed with life--had never borne a name.  When she had first seen 
me in the church she had been startled and had thought of what 
would have been like me if it had ever lived, and had lived on, but 
that was all then.

What more the letter told me needs not to be repeated here.  It has 
its own times and places in my story.

My first care was to burn what my mother had written and to consume 
even its ashes.  I hope it may not appear very unnatural or bad in 
me that I then became heavily sorrowful to think I had ever been 
reared.  That I felt as if I knew it would have been better and 
happier for many people if indeed I had never breathed.  That I had 
a terror of myself as the danger and the possible disgrace of my 
own mother and of a proud family name.  That I was so confused and 
shaken as to be possessed by a belief that it was right and had 
been intended that I should die in my birth, and that it was wrong 
and not intended that I should be then alive.

These are the real feelings that I had.  I fell asleep worn out, 
and when I awoke I cried afresh to think that I was back in the 
world with my load of trouble for others.  I was more than ever 
frightened of myself, thinking anew of her against whom I was a 
witness, of the owner of Chesney Wold, of the new and terrible 
meaning of the old words now moaning in my ear like a surge upon 
the shore, "Your mother, Esther, was your disgrace, and you are 
hers.  The time will come--and soon enough--when you will 
understand this better, and will feel it too, as no one save a 
woman can."  With them, those other words returned, "Pray daily 
that the sins of others be not visited upon your head."  I could 
not disentangle all that was about me, and I felt as if the blame 
and the shame were all in me, and the visitation had come down.

The day waned into a gloomy evening, overcast and sad, and I still 
contended with the same distress.  I went out alone, and after 
walking a little in the park, watching the dark shades falling on 
the trees and the fitful flight of the bats, which sometimes almost 
touched me, was attracted to the house for the first time.  Perhaps 
I might not have gone near it if I had been in a stronger frame of 
mind.  As it was, I took the path that led close by it.

I did not dare to linger or to look up, but I passed before the 
terrace garden with its fragrant odours, and its broad walks, and 
its well-kept beds and smooth turf; and I saw how beautiful and 
grave it was, and how the old stone balustrades and parapets, and 
wide flights of shallow steps, were seamed by time and weather; and 
how the trained moss and ivy grew about them, and around the old 
stone pedestal of the sun-dial; and I heard the fountain falling.  
Then the way went by long lines of dark windows diversified by 
turreted towers and porches of eccentric shapes, where old stone 
lions and grotesque monsters bristled outside dens of shadow and 
snarled at the evening gloom over the escutcheons they held in 
their grip.  Thence the path wound underneath a gateway, and 
through a court-yard where the principal entrance was (I hurried 
quickly on), and by the stables where none but deep voices seemed 
to be, whether in the murmuring of the wind through the strong mass 
of ivy holding to a high red wall, or in the low complaining of the 
weathercock, or in the barking of the dogs, or in the slow striking 
of a clock.  So, encountering presently a sweet smell of limes, 
whose rustling I could hear, I turned with the turning of the path 
to the south front, and there above me were the balustrades of the 
Ghost's Walk and one lighted window that might be my mother's.

The way was paved here, like the terrace overhead, and my footsteps 
from being noiseless made an echoing sound upon the flags.  
Stopping to look at nothing, but seeing all I did see as I went, I 
was passing quickly on, and in a few moments should have passed the 
lighted window, when my echoing footsteps brought it suddenly into 
my mind that there was a dreadful truth in the legend of the 
Ghost's Walk, that it was I who was to bring calamity upon the 
stately house and that my warning feet were haunting it even then.  
Seized with an augmented terror of myself which turned me cold, I 
ran from myself and everything, retraced the way by which I had 
come, and never paused until I had gained the lodge-gate, and the 
park lay sullen and black behind me.

Not before I was alone in my own room for the night and had again 
been dejected and unhappy there did I begin to know how wrong and 
thankless this state was.  But from my darling who was coming on 
the morrow, I found a joyful letter, full of such loving 
anticipation that I must have been of marble if it had not moved 
me; from my guardian, too, I found another letter, asking me to 
tell Dame Durden, if I should see that little woman anywhere, that 
they had moped most pitiably without her, that the housekeeping was 
going to rack and ruin, that nobody else could manage the keys, and 
that everybody in and about the house declared it was not the same 
house and was becoming rebellious for her return.  Two such letters 
together made me think how far beyond my deserts I was beloved and 
how happy I ought to be.  That made me think of all my past life; 
and that brought me, as it ought to have done before, into a better 
condition.

For I saw very well that I could not have been intended to die, or 
I should never have lived; not to say should never have been 
reserved for such a happy life.  I saw very well how many things 
had worked together for my welfare, and that if the sins of the 
fathers were sometimes visited upon the children, the phrase did 
not mean what I had in the morning feared it meant.  I knew I was 
as innocent of my birth as a queen of hers and that before my 
Heavenly Father I should not be punished for birth nor a queen 
rewarded for it.  I had had experience, in the shock of that very 
day, that I could, even thus soon, find comforting reconcilements 
to the change that had fallen on me.  I renewed my resolutions and 
prayed to be strengthened in them, pouring out my heart for myself 
and for my unhappy mother and feeling that the darkness of the 
morning was passing away.  It was not upon my sleep; and when the 
next day's light awoke me, it was gone.

My dear girl was to arrive at five o'clock in the afternoon.  How 
to help myself through the intermediate time better than by taking 
a long walk along the road by which she was to come, I did not 
know; so Charley and I and Stubbs--Stubbs saddled, for we never 
drove him after the one great occasion--made a long expedition 
along that road and back.  On our return, we held a great review of 
the house and garden and saw that everything was in its prettiest 
condition, and had the bird out ready as an important part of the 
establishment.

There were more than two full hours yet to elapse before she could 
come, and in that interval, which seemed a long one, I must confess 
I was nervously anxious about my altered looks.  I loved my darling 
so well that I was more concerned for their effect on her than on 
any one.  I was not in this slight distress because I at all 
repined--I am quite certain I did not, that day--but, I thought, 
would she be wholly prepared?  When she first saw me, might she not 
be a little shocked and disappointed?  Might it not prove a little 
worse than she expected?  Might she not look for her old Esther and 
not find her?  Might she not have to grow used to me and to begin 
all over again?

I knew the various expressions of my sweet girl's face so well, and 
it was such an honest face in its loveliness, that I was sure 
beforehand she could not hide that first look from me.  And I 
considered whether, if it should signify any one of these meanings, 
which was so very likely, could I quite answer for myself?

Well, I thought I could.  After last night, I thought I could.  But 
to wait and wait, and expect and expect, and think and think, was 
such bad preparation that I resolved to go along the road again and 
meet her.

So I said to Charley, '"Charley, I will go by myself and walk along 
the road until she comes."  Charley highly approving of anything 
that pleased me, I went and left her at home.

But before I got to the second milestone, I had been in so many 
palpitations from seeing dust in the distance (though I knew it was 
not, and could not, be the coach yet) that I resolved to turn back 
and go home again.  And when I had turned, I was in such fear of 
the coach coming up behind me (though I still knew that it neither 
would, nor could, do any such thing) that I ran the greater part of 
the way to avoid being overtaken.

Then, I considered, when I had got safe back again, this was a nice 
thing to have done!  Now I was hot and had made the worst of it 
instead of the best.

At last, when I believed there was at least a quarter of an hour 
more yet, Charley all at once cried out to me as I was trembling in 
the garden, "Here she comes, miss!  Here she is!"

I did not mean to do it, but I ran upstairs into my room and hid 
myself behind the door.  There I stood trembling, even when I heard 
my darling calling as she came upstairs, "Esther, my dear, my love, 
where are you?  Little woman, dear Dame Durden!"

She ran in, and was running out again when she saw me.  Ah, my 
angel girl!  The old dear look, all love, all fondness, all 
affection.  Nothing else in it--no, nothing, nothing!

Oh, how happy I was, down upon the floor, with my sweet beautiful 
girl down upon the floor too, holding my scarred face to her lovely 
cheek, bathing it with tears and kisses, rocking me to and fro like 
a child, calling me by every tender name that she could think of, 
and pressing me to her faithful heart.



CHAPTER XXXVII

Jarndyce and Jarndyce


If the secret I had to keep had been mine, I must have confided it 
to Ada before we had been long together.  But it was not mine, and 
I did not feel that I had a right to tell it, even to my guardian, 
unless some great emergency arose.  It was a weight to bear alone; 
still my present duty appeared to be plain, and blest in the 
attachment of my dear, I did not want an impulse and encouragement 
to do it.  Though often when she was asleep and all was quiet, the 
remembrance of my mother kept me waking and made the night 
sorrowful, I did not yield to it at another time; and Ada found me 
what I used to be--except, of course, in that particular of which I 
have said enough and which I have no intention of mentioning any 
more just now, if I can help it.

The difficulty that I felt in being quite composed that first 
evening when Ada asked me, over our work, if the family were at the 
house, and when I was obliged to answer yes, I believed so, for 
Lady Dedlock had spoken to me in the woods the day before 
yesterday, was great.  Greater still when Ada asked me what she had 
said, and when I replied that she had been kind and interested, and 
when Ada, while admitting her beauty and elegance, remarked upon 
her proud manner and her imperious chilling air.  But Charley 
helped me through, unconsciously, by telling us that Lady Dedlock 
had only stayed at the house two nights on her way from London to 
visit at some other great house in the next county and that she had 
left early on the morning after we had seen her at our view, as we 
called it.  Charley verified the adage about little pitchers, I am 
sure, for she heard of more sayings and doings in a day than would 
have come to my ears in a month.

We were to stay a month at Mr. Boythorn's.  My pet had scarcely 
been there a bright week, as I recollect the time, when one evening 
after we had finished helping the gardener in watering his flowers, 
and just as the candles were lighted, Charley, appearing with a 
very important air behind Ada's chair, beckoned me mysteriously out 
of the room.

"Oh! If you please, miss," said Charley in a whisper, with her eyes 
at their roundest and largest.  "You're wanted at the Dedlock 
Arms."

"Why, Charley," said I, "who can possibly want me at the public-
house?"

"I don't know, miss," returned Charley, putting her head forward 
and folding her hands tight upon the band of her little apron, 
which she always did in the enjoyment of anything mysterious or 
confidential, "but it's a gentleman, miss, and his compliments, and 
will you please to come without saying anything about it."

"Whose compliments, Charley?"

"His'n, miss," returned Charley, whose grammatical education was 
advancing, but not very rapidly.

"And how do you come to be the messenger, Charley?"

"I am not the messenger, if you please, miss," returned my little 
maid.  "It was W. Grubble, miss."

"And who is W. Grubble, Charley?"

"Mister Grubble, miss," returned Charley.  "Don't you know, miss?  
The Dedlock Arms, by W. Grubble," which Charley delivered as if she 
were slowly spelling out the sign.

"Aye?  The landlord, Charley?"

"Yes, miss.  If you please, miss, his wife is a beautiful woman, 
but she broke her ankle, and it never joined.  And her brother's 
the sawyer that was put in the cage, miss, and they expect he'll 
drink himself to death entirely on beer," said Charley.

Not knowing what might be the matter, and being easily apprehensive 
now, I thought it best to go to this place by myself.  I bade 
Charley be quick with my bonnet and veil and my shawl, and having 
put them on, went away down the little hilly street, where I was as 
much at home as in Mr. Boythorn's garden.

Mr. Grubble was standing in his shirt-sleeves at the door of his 
very clean little tavern waiting for me.  He lifted off his hat 
with both hands when he saw me coming, and carrying it so, as if it 
were an iron vessel (it looked as heavy), preceded me along the 
sanded passage to his best parlour, a neat carpeted room with more 
plants in it than were quite convenient, a coloured print of Queen 
Caroline, several shells, a good many tea-trays, two stuffed and 
dried fish in glass cases, and either a curious egg or a curious 
pumpkin (but I don't know which, and I doubt if many people did) 
hanging from his ceiling.  I knew Mr. Grubble very well by sight, 
from his often standing at his door.  A pleasant-looking, stoutish, 
middle-aged man who never seemed to consider himself cozily dressed 
for his own fire-side without his hat and top-boots, but who never 
wore a coat except at church.

He snuffed the candle, and backing away a little to see how it 
looked, backed out of the room--unexpectedly to me, for I was going 
to ask him by whom he had been sent.  The door of the opposite 
parlour being then opened, I heard some voices, familiar in my ears 
I thought, which stopped.  A quick light step approached the room 
in which I was, and who should stand before me but Richard!

"My dear Esther!" he said.  "My best friend!"  And he really was so 
warm-hearted and earnest that in the first surprise and pleasure of 
his brotherly greeting I could scarcely find breath to tell him 
that Ada was well.

"Answering my very thoughts--always the same dear girl!" said 
Richard, leading me to a chair and seating himself beside me.

I put my veil up, but not quite.

"Always the same dear girl!" said Richard just as heartily as 
before.

I put up my veil altogether, and laying my hand on Richard's sleeve 
and looking in his face, told him how much I thanked him for his 
kind welcome and how greatly I rejoiced to see him, the more so 
because of the determination I had made in my illness, which I now 
conveyed to him.

"My love," said Richard, "there is no one with whom I have a 
greater wish to talk than you, for I want you to understand me."

"And I want you, Richard," said I, shaking my head, "to understand 
some one else."

"Since you refer so immediately to John Jarndyce," said Richard, "
--I suppose you mean him?"

"Of course I do."

"Then I may say at once that I am glad of it, because it is on that 
subject that I am anxious to be understood.  By you, mind--you, my 
dear!  I am not accountable to Mr. Jarndyce or Mr. Anybody."

I was pained to find him taking this tone, and he observed it.

"Well, well, my dear," said Richard, "we won't go into that now.  I 
want to appear quietly in your country-house here, with you under 
my arm, and give my charming cousin a surprise.  I suppose your 
loyalty to John Jarndyce will allow that?"

"My dear Richard," I returned, "you know you would be heartily 
welcome at his house--your home, if you will but consider it so; 
and you are as heartily welcome here!"

"Spoken like the best of little women!" cried Richard gaily.

I asked him how he liked his profession.

"Oh, I like it well enough!" said Richard.  "It's all right.  It 
does as well as anything else, for a time.  I don't know that I 
shall care about it when I come to be settled, but I can sell out 
then and--however, never mind all that botheration at present."

So young and handsome, and in all respects so perfectly the 
opposite of Miss Flite!  And yet, in the clouded, eager, seeking 
look that passed over him, so dreadfully like her!

"I am in town on leave just now," said Richard.

"Indeed?"

"Yes.  I have run over to look after my--my Chancery interests 
before the long vacation," said Richard, forcing a careless laugh.  
"We are beginning to spin along with that old suit at last, I 
promise you."

No wonder that I shook my head!

"As you say, it's not a pleasant subject."  Richard spoke with the 
same shade crossing his face as before.  "Let it go to the four 
winds for to-night.  Puff!  Gone!  Who do you suppose is with me?"

"Was it Mr. Skimpole's voice I heard?"

"That's the man!  He does me more good than anybody.  What a 
fascinating child it is!"

I asked Richard if any one knew of their coming down together.  He 
answered, no, nobody.  He had been to call upon the dear old 
infant--so he called Mr. Skimpole--and the dear old infant had told 
him where we were, and he had told the dear old infant he was bent 
on coming to see us, and the dear old infant had directly wanted to 
come too; and so he had brought him.  "And he is worth--not to say 
his sordid expenses--but thrice his weight in gold," said Richard.  
"He is such a cheery fellow.  No worldliness about him.  Fresh and 
green-hearted!"

I certainly did not see the proof of Mr. Skimpole's worldliness in 
his having his expenses paid by Richard, but I made no remark about 
that.  Indeed, he came in and turned our conversation.  He was 
charmed to see me, said he had been shedding delicious tears of joy 
and sympathy at intervals for six weeks on my account, had never 
been so happy as in hearing of my progress, began to understand the 
mixture of good and evil in the world now, felt that he appreciated 
health the more when somebody else was ill, didn't know but what it 
might be in the scheme of things that A should squint to make B 
happier in looking straight or that C should carry a wooden leg to 
make D better satisfied with his flesh and blood in a silk 
stocking.

"My dear Miss Summerson, here is our friend Richard," said Mr. 
Skimpole, "full of the brightest visions of the future, which he 
evokes out of the darkness of Chancery.  Now that's delightful, 
that's inspiriting, that's full of poetry!  In old times the woods 
and solitudes were made joyous to the shepherd by the imaginary 
piping and dancing of Pan and the nymphs.  This present shepherd, 
our pastoral Richard, brightens the dull Inns of Court by making 
Fortune and her train sport through them to the melodious notes of 
a judgment from the bench.  That's very pleasant, you know!  Some 
ill-conditioned growling fellow may say to me, 'What's the use of 
these legal and equitable abuses?  How do you defend them?'  I 
reply, 'My growling friend, I DON'T defend them, but they are very 
agreeable to me.  There is a shepherd--youth, a friend of mine, who 
transmutes them into something highly fascinating to my simplicity.  
I don't say it is for this that they exist--for I am a child among 
you worldly grumblers, and not called upon to account to you or 
myself for anything--but it may be so.'"

I began seriously to think that Richard could scarcely have found a 
worse friend than this.  It made me uneasy that at such a time when 
he most required some right principle and purpose he should have 
this captivating looseness and putting-off of everything, this airy 
dispensing with all principle and purpose, at his elbow.  I thought 
I could understand how such a nature as my guardian's, experienced 
in the world and forced to contemplate the miserable evasions and 
contentions of the family misfortune, found an immense relief in 
Mr. Skimpole's avowal of his weaknesses and display of guileless 
candour; but I could not satisfy myself that it was as artless as 
it seemed or that it did not serve Mr. Skimpole's idle turn quite 
as well as any other part, and with less trouble.

They both walked back with me, and Mr. Skimpole leaving us at the 
gate, I walked softly in with Richard and said, "Ada, my love, I 
have brought a gentleman to visit you."  It was not difficult to 
read the blushing, startled face.  She loved him dearly, and he 
knew it, and I knew it.  It was a very transparent business, that 
meeting as cousins only.

I almost mistrusted myself as growing quite wicked in my 
suspicions, but I was not so sure that Richard loved her dearly.  
He admired her very much--any one must have done that--and I dare 
say would have renewed their youthful engagement with great pride 
and ardour but that he knew how she would respect her promise to my 
guardian.  Still I had a tormenting idea that the influence upon 
him extended even here, that he was postponing his best truth and 
earnestness in this as in all things until Jarndyce and Jarndyce 
should be off his mind.  Ah me!  What Richard would have been 
without that blight, I never shall know now!

He told Ada, in his most ingenuous way, that he had not come to 
make any secret inroad on the terms she had accepted (rather too 
implicitly and confidingly, he thought) from Mr. Jarndyce, that he 
had come openly to see her and to see me and to justify himself for 
the present terms on which he stood with Mr. Jarndyce.  As the dear 
old infant would be with us directly, he begged that I would make 
an appointment for the morning, when he might set himself right 
through the means of an unreserved conversation with me.  I 
proposed to walk with him in the park at seven o'clock, and this 
was arranged.  Mr. Skimpole soon afterwards appeared and made us 
merry for an hour.  He particularly requested to see little 
Coavinses (meaning Charley) and told her, with a patriarchal air, 
that he had given her late father all the business in his power and 
that if one of her little brothers would make haste to get set up 
in the same profession, he hoped he should still be able to put a 
good deal of employment in his way.

"For I am constantly being taken in these nets," said Mr. Skimpole, 
looking beamingly at us over a glass of wine-and-water, "and am 
constantly being bailed out--like a boat.  Or paid off--like a 
ship's company.  Somebody always does it for me.  I can't do it, 
you know, for I never have any money.  But somebody does it.  I get 
out by somebody's means; I am not like the starling; I get out.  If 
you were to ask me who somebody is, upon my word I couldn't tell 
you.  Let us drink to somebody.  God bless him!"

Richard was a little late in the morning, but I had not to wait for 
him long, and we turned into the park.  The air was bright and dewy 
and the sky without a cloud.  The birds sang delightfully; the 
sparkles in the fern, the grass, and trees, were exquisite to see; 
the richness of the woods seemed to have increased twenty-fold 
since yesterday, as if, in the still night when they had looked so 
massively hushed in sleep, Nature, through all the minute details 
of every wonderful leaf, had been more wakeful than usual for the 
glory of that day.

"This is a lovely place," said Richard, looking round.  "None of 
the jar and discord of law-suits here!"

But there was other trouble.

"I tell you what, my dear girl," said Richard, "when I get affairs 
in general settled, I shall come down here, I think, and rest."

"Would it not be better to rest now?" I asked.

"Oh, as to resting NOW," said Richard, "or as to doing anything 
very definite NOW, that's not easy.  In short, it can't be done; I 
can't do it at least."

"Why not?" said I.

"You know why not, Esther.  If you were living in an unfinished 
house, liable to have the roof put on or taken off--to be from top 
to bottom pulled down or built up--to-morrow, next day, next week, 
next month, next year--you would find it hard to rest or settle.  
So do I.  Now?  There's no now for us suitors."

I could almost have believed in the attraction on which my poor 
little wandering friend had expatiated when I saw again the 
darkened look of last night.  Terrible to think it bad in it also a 
shade of that unfortunate man who had died.

"My dear Richard," said I, "this is a bad beginning of our 
conversation."

"I knew you would tell me so, Dame Durden."

"And not I alone, dear Richard.  It was not I who cautioned you 
once never to found a hope or expectation on the family curse."

"There you come back to John Jarndyce!" said Richard impatiently.  
"Well! We must approach him sooner or later, for he is the staple 
of what I have to say, and it's as well at once.  My dear Esther, 
how can you be so blind?  Don't you see that he is an interested 
party and that it may be very well for him to wish me to know 
nothing of the suit, and care nothing about it, but that it may not 
be quite so well for me?"

"Oh, Richard," I remonstrated, "is it possible that you can ever 
have seen him and heard him, that you can ever have lived under his 
roof and known him, and can yet breathe, even to me in this 
solitary place where there is no one to hear us, such unworthy 
suspicions?"

He reddened deeply, as if his natural generosity felt a pang of 
reproach.  He was silent for a little while before he replied in a 
subdued voice, "Esther, I am sure you know that I am not a mean 
fellow and that I have some sense of suspicion and distrust being 
poor qualities in one of my years."

"I know it very well," said I.  "I am not more sure of anything."

"That's a dear girl," retorted Richard, "and like you, because it 
gives me comfort.  I had need to get some scrap of comfort out of 
all this business, for it's a bad one at the best, as I have no 
occasion to tell you."

"I know perfectly," said I.  "I know as well, Richard--what shall I 
say? as well as you do--that such misconstructions are foreign to 
your nature.  And I know, as well as you know, what so changes it."

"Come, sister, come," said Richard a little more gaily, "you will 
be fair with me at all events.  If I have the misfortune to be 
under that influence, so has he.  If it has a little twisted me, it 
may have a little twisted him too.  I don't say that he is not an 
honourable man, out of all this complication and uncertainty; I am 
sure he is.  But it taints everybody.  You know it taints 
everybody.  You have heard him say so fifty times.  Then why should 
HE escape?"

"Because," said I, "his is an uncommon character, and he has 
resolutely kept himself outside the circle, Richard."

"Oh, because and because!" replied Richard in his vivacious way.  
"I am not sure, my dear girl, but that it may be wise and specious 
to preserve that outward indifference.  It may cause other parties 
interested to become lax about their interests; and people may die 
off, and points may drag themselves out of memory, and many things 
may smoothly happen that are convenient enough."

I was so touched with pity for Richard that I could not reproach 
him any more, even by a look.  I remembered my guardian's 
gentleness towards his errors and with what perfect freedom from 
resentment he had spoken of them.

"Esther," Richard resumed, "you are not to suppose that I have come 
here to make underhanded charges against John Jarndyce.  I have 
only come to justify myself.  What I say is, it was all very well 
and we got on very well while I was a boy, utterly regardless of 
this same suit; but as soon as I began to take an interest in it 
and to look into it, then it was quite another thing.  Then John 
Jarndyce discovers that Ada and I must break off and that if I 
don't amend that very objectionable course, I am not fit for her.  
Now, Esther, I don't mean to amend that very objectionable course: 
I will not hold John Jarndyce's favour on those unfair terms of 
compromise, which he has no right to dictate.  Whether it pleases 
him or displeases him, I must maintain my rights and Ada's.  I have 
been thinking about it a good deal, and this is the conclusion I 
have come to."

Poor dear Richard!  He had indeed been thinking about it a good 
deal.  His face, his voice, his manner, all showed that too 
plainly.

"So I tell him honourably (you are to know I have written to him 
about all this) that we are at issue and that we had better be at 
issue openly than covertly.  I thank him for his goodwill and his 
protection, and he goes his road, and I go mine.  The fact is, our 
roads are not the same.  Under one of the wills in dispute, I 
should take much more than he.  I don't mean to say that it is the 
one to be established, but there it is, and it has its chance."

"I have not to learn from you, my dear Richard," said I, "of your 
letter.  I had heard of it already without an offended or angry 
word."

"Indeed?" replied Richard, softening.  "I am glad I said he was an 
honourable man, out of all this wretched affair.  But I always say 
that and have never doubted it.  Now, my dear Esther, I know these 
views of mine appear extremely harsh to you, and will to Ada when 
you tell her what has passed between us.  But if you had gone into 
the case as I have, if you had only applied yourself to the papers 
as I did when I was at Kenge's, if you only knew what an 
accumulation of charges and counter-charges, and suspicions and 
cross-suspicions, they involve, you would think me moderate in 
comparison."

"Perhaps so," said I.  "But do you think that, among those many 
papers, there is much truth and justice, Richard?"

"There is truth and justice somewhere in the case, Esther--"

"Or was once, long ago," said I.

"Is--is--must be somewhere," pursued Richard impetuously, "and must 
be brought out.  To allow Ada to be made a bribe and hush-money of 
is not the way to bring it out.  You say the suit is changing me; 
John Jarndyce says it changes, has changed, and will change 
everybody who has any share in it.  Then the greater right I have 
on my side when I resolve to do all I can to bring it to an end."

"All you can, Richard!  Do you think that in these many years no 
others have done all they could?  Has the difficulty grown easier 
because of so many failures?"

"It can't last for ever," returned Richard with a fierceness 
kindling in him which again presented to me that last sad reminder.  
"I am young and earnest, and energy and determination have done 
wonders many a time.  Others have only half thrown themselves into 
it.  I devote myself to it.  I make it the object of my life."

"Oh, Richard, my dear, so much the worse, so much the worse!"

"No, no, no, don't you be afraid for me," he returned 
affectionately.  "You're a dear, good, wise, quiet, blessed girl; 
but you have your prepossessions.  So I come round to John 
Jarndyce.  I tell you, my good Esther, when he and I were on those 
terms which he found so convenient, we were not on natural terms."

"Are division and animosity your natural terms, Richard?"

"No, I don't say that.  I mean that all this business puts us on 
unnatural terms, with which natural relations are incompatible.  
See another reason for urging it on!  I may find out when it's over 
that I have been mistaken in John Jarndyce.  My head may be clearer 
when I am free of it, and I may then agree with what you say to-
day.  Very well.  Then I shall acknowledge it and make him 
reparation."

Everything postponed to that imaginary time!  Everything held in 
confusion and indecision until then!

"Now, my best of confidantes," said Richard, "I want my cousin Ada 
to understand that I am not captious, fickle, and wilful about John 
Jarndyce, but that I have this purpose and reason at my back.  I 
wish to represent myself to her through you, because she has a 
great esteem and respect for her cousin John; and I know you will 
soften the course I take, even though you disapprove of it; and--
and in short," said Richard, who had been hesitating through these 
words, "I--I don't like to represent myself in this litigious, 
contentious, doubting character to a confiding girl like Ada,"

I told him that he was more like himself in those latter words than 
in anything he had said yet.

"Why," acknowledged Richard, "that may be true enough, my love.  I 
rather feel it to be so.  But I shall be able to give myself fair-
play by and by.  I shall come all right again, then, don't you be 
afraid."

I asked him if this were all he wished me to tell Ada.

"Not quite," said Richard.  "I am bound not to withhold from her 
that John Jarndyce answered my letter in his usual manner, 
addressing me as 'My dear Rick,' trying to argue me out of my 
opinions, and telling me that they should make no difference in 
him.  (All very well of course, but not altering the case.)  I also 
want Ada to know that if I see her seldom just now, I am looking 
after her interests as well as my own--we two being in the same 
boat exactly--and that I hope she will not suppose from any flying 
rumours she may hear that I am at all light-headed or imprudent; on 
the contrary, I am always looking forward to the termination of the 
suit, and always planning in that direction.  Being of age now and 
having taken the step I have taken, I consider myself free from any 
accountability to John Jarndyce; but Ada being still a ward of the 
court, I don't yet ask her to renew our engagement.  When she is 
free to act for herself, I shall be myself once more and we shall 
both be in very different worldly circumstances, I believe.  If you 
tell her all this with the advantage of your considerate way, you 
will do me a very great and a very kind service, my dear Esther; 
and I shall knock Jarndyce and Jarndyce on the head with greater 
vigour.  Of course I ask for no secrecy at Bleak House."

"Richard," said I, "you place great confidence in me, but I fear 
you will not take advice from me?"

"It's impossible that I can on this subject, my dear girl.  On any 
other, readily."

As if there were any other in his life!  As if his whole career and 
character were not being dyed one colour!

"But I may ask you a question, Richard?"

"I think so," said he, laughing.  "I don't know who may not, if you 
may not."

"You say, yourself, you are not leading a very settled life."

"How can I, my dear Esther, with nothing settled!"

"Are you in debt again?"

"Why, of course I am," said Richard, astonished at my simplicity.

"Is it of course?"

"My dear child, certainly.  I can't throw myself into an object so 
completely without expense.  You forget, or perhaps you don't know, 
that under either of the wills Ada and I take something.  It's only 
a question between the larger sum and the smaller.  I shall be 
within the mark any way.  Bless your heart, my excellent girl," 
said Richard, quite amused with me, "I shall be all right!  I shall 
pull through, my dear!"

I felt so deeply sensible of the danger in which he stood that I 
tried, in Ada's name, in my guardian's, in my own, by every fervent 
means that I could think of, to warn him of it and to show him some 
of his mistakes.  He received everything I said with patience and 
gentleness, but it all rebounded from him without taking the least 
effect.  I could not wonder at this after the reception his 
preoccupied mind had given to my guardian's letter, but I 
determined to try Ada's influence yet.

So when our walk brought us round to the village again, and I went 
home to breakfast, I prepared Ada for the account I was going to 
give her and told her exactly what reason we had to dread that 
Richard was losing himself and scattering his whole life to the 
winds.  It made her very unhappy, of course, though she had a far, 
far greater reliance on his correcting his errors than I could 
have--which was so natural and loving in my dear!--and she 
presently wrote him this little letter:


My dearest cousin,

Esther has told me all you said to her this morning.  I write this 
to repeat most earnestly for myself all that she said to you and to 
let you know how sure I am that you will sooner or later find our 
cousin John a pattern of truth, sincerity, and goodness, when you 
will deeply, deeply grieve to have done him (without intending it) 
so much wrong.

I do not quite know how to write what I wish to say next, but I 
trust you will understand it as I mean it.  I have some fears, my 
dearest cousin, that it may be partly for my sake you are now 
laying up so much unhappiness for yourself--and if for yourself, 
for me.  In case this should be so, or in case you should entertain 
much thought of me in what you are doing, I most earnestly entreat 
and beg you to desist.  You can do nothing for my sake that will 
make me half so happy as for ever turning your back upon the shadow 
in which we both were born.  Do not be angry with me for saying 
this.  Pray, pray, dear Richard, for my sake, and for your own, and 
in a natural repugnance for that source of trouble which had its 
share in making us both orphans when we were very young, pray, 
pray, let it go for ever.  We have reason to know by this time that 
there is no good in it and no hope, that there is nothing to be got 
from it but sorrow.

My dearest cousin, it is needless for me to say that you are quite 
free and that it is very likely you may find some one whom you will 
love much better than your first fancy.  I am quite sure, if you 
will let me say so, that the object of your choice would greatly 
prefer to follow your fortunes far and wide, however moderate or 
poor, and see you happy, doing your duty and pursuing your chosen 
way, than to have the hope of being, or even to be, very rich with 
you (if such a thing were possible) at the cost of dragging years 
of procrastination and anxiety and of your indifference to other 
aims.  You may wonder at my saying this so confidently with so 
little knowledge or experience, but I know it for a certainty from 
my own heart.

Ever, my dearest cousin, your most affectionate

Ada


This note brought Richard to us very soon, but it made little 
change in him if any.  We would fairly try, he said, who was right 
and who was wrong--he would show us--we should see!  He was 
animated and glowing, as if Ada's tenderness had gratified him; but 
I could only hope, with a sigh, that the letter might have some 
stronger effect upon his mind on re-perusal than it assuredly had 
then.

As they were to remain with us that day and had taken their places 
to return by the coach next morning, I sought an opportunity of 
speaking to Mr. Skimpole.  Our out-of-door life easily threw one in 
my way, and I delicately said that there was a responsibility in 
encouraging Richard.

"Responsibility, my dear Miss Summerson?" he repeated, catching at 
the word with the pleasantest smile.  "I am the last man in the 
world for such a thing.  I never was responsible in my life--I 
can't be."

"I am afraid everybody is obliged to be," said I timidly enough, he 
being so much older and more clever than I.

"No, really?" said Mr. Skimpole, receiving this new light with a 
most agreeable jocularity of surprise.  "But every man's not 
obliged to be solvent?  I am not.  I never was.  See, my dear Miss 
Summerson," he took a handful of loose silver and halfpence from 
his pocket, "there's so much money.  I have not an idea how much.  
I have not the power of counting.  Call it four and ninepence--call 
it four pound nine.  They tell me I owe more than that.  I dare say 
I do.  I dare say I owe as much as good-natured people will let me 
owe.  If they don't stop, why should I?  There you have Harold 
Skimpole in little.  If that's responsibility, I am responsible."

The perfect ease of manner with which he put the money up again and 
looked at me with a smile on his refined face, as if he had been 
mentioning a curious little fact about somebody else, almost made 
me feel as if he really had nothing to do with it.

"Now, when you mention responsibility," he resumed, "I am disposed 
to say that I never had the happiness of knowing any one whom I 
should consider so refreshingly responsible as yourself.  You 
appear to me to be the very touchstone of responsibility.  When I 
see you, my dear Miss Summerson, intent upon the perfect working of 
the whole little orderly system of which you are the centre, I feel 
inclined to say to myself--in fact I do say to myself very often--
THAT'S responsibility!"

It was difficult, after this, to explain what I meant; but I 
persisted so far as to say that we all hoped he would check and not 
confirm Richard in the sanguine views he entertained just then.

"Most willingly," he retorted, "if I could.  But, my dear Miss 
Summerson, I have no art, no disguise.  If he takes me by the hand 
and leads me through Westminster Hall in an airy procession after 
fortune, I must go.  If he says, 'Skimpole, join the dance!'  I 
must join it.  Common sense wouldn't, I know, but I have NO common 
sense."

It was very unfortunate for Richard, I said.

"Do you think so!" returned Mr. Skimpole.  "Don't say that, don't 
say that.  Let us suppose him keeping company with Common Sense--an 
excellent man--a good deal wrinkled--dreadfully practical--change 
for a ten-pound note in every pocket--ruled account-book in his 
hand--say, upon the whole, resembling a tax-gatherer.  Our dear 
Richard, sanguine, ardent, overleaping obstacles, bursting with 
poetry like a young bud, says to this highly respectable companion, 
'I see a golden prospect before me; it's very bright, it's very 
beautiful, it's very joyous; here I go, bounding over the landscape 
to come at it!'  The respectable companion instantly knocks him 
down with the ruled account-book; tells him in a literal, prosaic 
way that he sees no such thing; shows him it's nothing but fees, 
fraud, horsehair wigs, and black gowns.  Now you know that's a 
painful change--sensible in the last degree, I have no doubt, but 
disagreeable.  I can't do it.  I haven't got the ruled account-
book, I have none of the tax-gatherlng elements in my composition, 
I am not at all respectable, and I don't want to be.  Odd perhaps, 
but so it is!"

It was idle to say more, so I proposed that we should join Ada and 
Richard, who were a little in advance, and I gave up Mr. Skimpole 
in despair.  He had been over the Hall in the course of the morning 
and whimsically described the family pictures as we walked.  There 
were such portentous shepherdesses among the Ladies Dedlock dead 
and gone, he told us, that peaceful crooks became weapons of 
assault in their hands.  They tended their flocks severely in 
buckram and powder and put their sticking-plaster patches on to 
terrify commoners as the chiefs of some other tribes put on their 
war-paint.  There was a Sir Somebody Dedlock, with a battle, a 
sprung-mine, volumes of smoke, flashes of lightning, a town on 
fire, and a stormed fort, all in full action between his horse's 
two hind legs, showing, he supposed, how little a Dedlock made of 
such trifles.  The whole race he represented as having evidently 
been, in life, what he called "stuffed people"--a large collection, 
glassy eyed, set up in the most approved manner on their various 
twigs and perches, very correct, perfectly free from animation, and 
always in glass cases.

I was not so easy now during any reference to the name but that I 
felt it a relief when Richard, with an exclamation of surprise, 
hurried away to meet a stranger whom he first descried coming 
slowly towards us.

"Dear me!" said Mr. Skimpole.  "Vholes!"

We asked if that were a friend of Richard's.

"Friend and legal adviser," said Mr. Skimpole.  "Now, my dear Miss 
Summerson, if you want common sense, responsibility, and 
respectability, all united--if you want an exemplary man--Vholes is 
THE man."

We had not known, we said, that Richard was assisted by any 
gentleman of that name.

"When he emerged from legal infancy," returned Mr. Skimpole, "he 
parted from our conversational friend Kenge and took up, I believe, 
with Vholes.  Indeed, I know he did, because I introduced him to 
Vholes."

"Had you known him long?" asked Ada.

"Vholes?  My dear Miss Clare, I had had that kind of acquaintance 
with him which I have had with several gentlemen of his profession.  
He had done something or other in a very agreeable, civil manner--
taken proceedings, I think, is the expression--which ended in the 
proceeding of his taking ME.  Somebody was so good as to step in 
and pay the money--something and fourpence was the amount; I forget 
the pounds and shillings, but I know it ended with fourpence, 
because it struck me at the time as being so odd that I could owe 
anybody fourpence--and after that I brought them together.  Vholes 
asked me for the introduction, and I gave it.  Now I come to think 
of it," he looked inquiringly at us with his frankest smile as he 
made the discovery, "Vholes bribed me, perhaps?  He gave me 
something and called it commission.  Was it a five-pound note?  Do 
you know, I think it MUST have been a five-pound note!"

His further consideration of the point was prevented by Richard's 
coming back to us in an excited state and hastily representing Mr. 
Vholes--a sallow man with pinched lips that looked as if they were 
cold, a red eruption here and there upon his face, tall and thin, 
about fifty years of age, high-shouldered, and stooping.  Dressed 
in black, black-gloved, and buttoned to the chin, there was nothing 
so remarkable in him as a lifeless manner and a slow, fixed way he 
had of looking at Richard.

"I hope I don't disturb you, ladies," said Mr. Vholes, and now I 
observed that he was further remarkable for an inward manner of 
speaking.  "I arranged with Mr. Carstone that he should always know 
when his cause was in the Chancelor's paper, and being informed by 
one of my clerks last night after post time that it stood, rather 
unexpectedly, in the paper for to-morrow, I put myself into the 
coach early this morning and came down to confer with him."

"Yes," said Richard, flushed, and looking triumphantly at Ada and 
me, "we don't do these things in the old slow way now.  We spin 
along now!  Mr. Vholes, we must hire something to get over to the 
post town in, and catch the mail to-night, and go up by it!"

"Anything you please, sir," returned Mr. Vholes.  "I am quite at 
your service."

"Let me see," said Richard, looking at his watch.  "If I run down 
to the Dedlock, and get my portmanteau fastened up, and order a 
gig, or a chaise, or whatever's to be got, we shall have an hour 
then before starting.  I'll come back to tea.  Cousin Ada, will you 
and Esther take care of Mr. Vholes when I am gone?"

He was away directly, in his heat and hurry, and was soon lost in 
the dusk of evening.  We who were left walked on towards the house.

"Is Mr. Carstone's presence necessary to-morrow, Sir?" said I.  
"Can it do any good?"

"No, miss," Mr. Vholes replied.  "I am not aware that it can."

Both Ada and I expressed our regret that he should go, then, only 
to be disappointed.

"Mr. Carstone has laid down the principle of watching his own 
interests," said Mr. Vholes, "and when a client lays down his own 
principle, and it is not immoral, it devolves upon me to carry it 
out.  I wish in business to be exact and open.  I am a widower with 
three daughters--Emma, Jane, and Caroline--and my desire is so to 
discharge the duties of life as to leave them a good name.  This 
appears to be a pleasant spot, miss."

The remark being made to me in consequence of my being next him as 
we walked, I assented and enumerated its chief attractions.

"Indeed?" said Mr. Vholes.  "I have the privilege of supporting an 
aged father in the Vale of Taunton--his native place--and I admire 
that country very much.  I had no idea there was anything so 
attractive here."

To keep up the conversation, I asked Mr. Vholes if he would like to 
live altogether in the country.

"There, miss," said he, "you touch me on a tender string.  My 
health is not good (my digestion being much impaired), and if I had 
only myself to consider, I should take refuge in rural habits, 
especially as the cares of business have prevented me from ever 
coming much into contact with general society, and particularly 
with ladies' society, which I have most wished to mix in.  But with 
my three daughters, Emma, Jane, and Caroline--and my aged father--I 
cannot afford to be selfish.  It is true I have no longer to 
maintain a dear grandmother who died in her hundred and second 
year, but enough remains to render it indispensable that the mill 
should be always going."

It required some attention to hear him on account of his inward 
speaking and his lifeless manner.

"You will excuse my having mentioned my daughters," he said.  "They 
are my weak point.  I wish to leave the poor girls some little 
independence, as well as a good name."

We now arrived at Mr. Boythorn's house, where the tea-table, all 
prepared, was awaiting us.  Richard came in restless and hurried 
shortly afterwards, and leaning over Mr. Vholes's chair, whispered 
something in his ear.  Mr. Vholes replied aloud--or as nearly aloud 
I suppose as he had ever replied to anything--"You will drive me, 
will you, sir?  It is all the same to me, sir.  Anything you 
please.  I am quite at your service."

We understood from what followed that Mr. Skimpole was to be left 
until the morning to occupy the two places which had been already 
paid for.  As Ada and I were both in low spirits concerning Richard 
and very sorry so to part with him, we made it as plain as we 
politely could that we should leave Mr. Skimpole to the Dedlock 
Arms and retire when the night-travellers were gone.

Richard's high spirits carrying everything before them, we all went 
out together to the top of the hill above the village, where he had 
ordered a gig to wait and where we found a man with a lantern 
standing at the head of the gaunt pale horse that had been 
harnessed to it.

I never shall forget those two seated side by side in the lantern's 
light, Richard all flush and fire and laughter, with the reins in 
his hand; Mr. Vholes quite still, black-gloved, and buttoned up, 
looking at him as if he were looking at his prey and charming it.  
I have before me the whole picture of the warm dark night, the 
summer lightning, the dusty track of road closed in by hedgerows 
and high trees, the gaunt pale horse with his ears pricked up, and 
the driving away at speed to Jarndyce and Jarndyce.

My dear girl told me that night how Richard's being thereafter 
prosperous or ruined, befriended or deserted, could only make this 
difference to her, that the more he needed love from one unchanging 
heart, the more love that unchanging heart would have to give him; 
how he thought of her through his present errors, and she would 
think of him at all times--never of herself if she could devote 
herself to him, never of her own delights if she could minister to 
his.

And she kept her word?

I look along the road before me, where the distance already 
shortens and the journey's end is growing visible; and true and 
good above the dead sea of the Chancery suit and all the ashy fruit 
it cast ashore, I think I see my darling.



CHAPTER XXXVIII

A Struggle


When our time came for returning to Bleak House again, we were 
punctual to the day and were received with an overpowering welcome.  
I was perfectly restored to health and strength, and finding my 
housekeeping keys laid ready for me in my room, rang myself in as 
if I had been a new year, with a merry little peal.  "Once more, 
duty, duty, Esther," said I; "and if you are not overjoyed to do 
it, more than cheerfully and contentedly, through anything and 
everything, you ought to be.  That's all I have to say to you, my 
dear!"

The first few mornings were mornings of so much bustle and 
business, devoted to such settlements of accounts, such repeated 
journeys to and fro between the growlery and all other parts of the 
house, so many rearrangements of drawers and presses, and such a 
general new beginning altogether, that I had not a moment's 
leisure.  But when these arrangements were completed and everything 
was in order, I paid a visit of a few hours to London, which 
something in the letter I had destroyed at Chesney Wold had induced 
me to decide upon in my own mind.

I made Caddy Jellyby--her maiden name was so natural to me that I 
always called her by it--the pretext for this visit and wrote her a 
note previously asking the favour of her company on a little 
business expedition.  Leaving home very early in the morning, I got 
to London by stage-coach in such good time that I got to Newman 
Street with the day before me.

Caddy, who had not seen me since her wedding-day, was so glad and 
so affectionate that I was half inclined to fear I should make her 
husband jealous.  But he was, in his way, just as bad--I mean as 
good; and in short it was the old story, and nobody would leave me 
any possibility of doing anything meritorious.

The elder Mr. Turveydrop was in bed, I found, and Caddy was milling 
his chocolate, which a melancholy little boy who was an apprentice
--it seemed such a curious thing to be apprenticed to the trade of 
dancing--was waiting to carry upstairs.  Her father-in-law was 
extremely kind and considerate, Caddy told me, and they lived most 
happily together.  (When she spoke of their living together, she 
meant that the old gentleman had all the good things and all the 
good lodging, while she and her husband had what they could get, 
and were poked into two corner rooms over the Mews.)

"And how is your mama, Caddy?" said I.

"Why, I hear of her, Esther," replied Caddy, "through Pa, but I see 
very little of her.  We are good friends, I am glad to say, but Ma 
thinks there is something absurd in my having married a dancing-
master, and she is rather afraid of its extending to her."

It struck me that if Mrs. Jellyby had discharged her own natural 
duties and obligations before she swept the horizon with a 
telescope in search of others, she would have taken the best 
precautions against becoming absurd, but I need scarcely observe 
that I kept this to myself.

"And your papa, Caddy?"

"He comes here every evening," returned Caddy, "and is so fond of 
sitting in the corner there that it's a treat to see him."

Looking at the corner, I plainly perceived the mark of Mr. 
Jellyby's head against the wall.  It was consolatory to know that 
he had found such a resting-place for it.

"And you, Caddy," said I, "you are always busy, I'll be bound?"

"Well, my dear," returned Caddy, "I am indeed, for to tell you a 
grand secret, I am qualifying myself to give lessons.  Prince's 
health is not strong, and I want to be able to assist him.  What 
with schools, and classes here, and private pupils, AND the 
apprentices, he really has too much to do, poor fellow!"

The notion of the apprentices was still so odd to me that I asked 
Caddy if there were many of them.

"Four," said Caddy.  "One in-door, and three out.  They are very 
good children; only when they get together they WILL play--
children-like--instead of attending to their work.  So the little 
boy you saw just now waltzes by himself in the empty kitchen, and 
we distribute the others over the house as well as we can."

"That is only for their steps, of course?" said I.

"Only for their steps," said Caddy.  "In that way they practise, so 
many hours at a time, whatever steps they happen to be upon.  They 
dance in the academy, and at this time of year we do figures at 
five every morning."

"Why, what a laborious life!" I exclaimed.

"I assure you, my dear," returned Caddy, smiling, "when the out-
door apprentices ring us up in the morning (the bell rings into our 
room, not to disturb old Mr. Turveydrop), and when I put up the 
window and see them standing on the door-step with their little 
pumps under their arms, I am actually reminded of the Sweeps."

All this presented the art to me in a singular light, to be sure.  
Caddy enjoyed the effect of her communication and cheerfully 
recounted the particulars of her own studies.

"You see, my dear, to save expense I ought to know something of the 
piano, and I ought to know something of the kit too, and 
consequently I have to practise those two instruments as well as 
the details of our profession.  If Ma had been like anybody else, I 
might have had some little musical knowledge to begin upon.  
However, I hadn't any; and that part of the work is, at first, a 
little discouraging, I must allow.  But I have a very good ear, and 
I am used to drudgery--I have to thank Ma for that, at all events--
and where there's a will there's a way, you know, Esther, the world 
over."  Saying these words, Caddy laughingly sat down at a little 
jingling square piano and really rattled off a quadrille with great 
spirit.  Then she good-humouredly and blushingly got up again, and 
while she still laughed herself, said, "Don't laugh at me, please; 
that's a dear girl!"

I would sooner have cried, but I did neither.  I encouraged her and 
praised her with all my heart.  For I conscientiously believed, 
dancing-master's wife though she was, and dancing-mistress though 
in her limited ambition she aspired to be, she had struck out a 
natural, wholesome, loving course of industry and perseverance that 
was quite as good as a mission.

"My dear," said Caddy, delighted, "you can't think how you cheer 
me.  I shall owe you, you don't know how much.  What changes, 
Esther, even in my small world!  You recollect that first night, 
when I was so unpolite and inky?  Who would have thought, then, of 
my ever teaching people to dance, of all other possibilities and 
impossibilities!"

Her husband, who had left us while we had this chat, now coming 
back, preparatory to exercising the apprentices in the ball-room, 
Caddy informed me she was quite at my disposal.  But it was not my 
time yet, I was glad to tell her, for I should have been vexed to 
take her away then.  Therefore we three adjourned to the 
apprentices together, and I made one in the dance.

The apprentices were the queerest little people.  Besides the 
melancholy boy, who, I hoped, had not been made so by waltzing 
alone in the empty kitchen, there were two other boys and one dirty 
little limp girl in a gauzy dress.  Such a precocious little girl, 
with such a dowdy bonnet on (that, too, of a gauzy texture), who 
brought her sandalled shoes in an old threadbare velvet reticule.  
Such mean little boys, when they were not dancing, with string, and 
marbles, and cramp-bones in their pockets, and the most untidy legs 
and feet--and heels particularly.

I asked Caddy what had made their parents choose this profession 
for them.  Caddy said she didn't know; perhaps they were designed 
for teachers, perhaps for the stage.  They were all people in 
humble circumstances, and the melancholy boy's mother kept a 
ginger-beer shop.

We danced for an hour with great gravity, the melancholy child 
doing wonders with his lower extremities, in which there appeared 
to be some sense of enjoyment though it never rose above his waist.  
Caddy, while she was observant of her husband and was evidently 
founded upon him, had acquired a grace and self-possession of her 
own, which, united to her pretty face and figure, was uncommonly 
agreeable.  She already relieved him of much of the instruction of 
these young people, and he seldom interfered except to walk his 
part in the figure if he had anything to do in it.  He always 
played the tune.  The affectation of the gauzy child, and her 
condescension to the boys, was a sight.  And thus we danced an hour 
by the clock.

When the practice was concluded, Caddy's husband made himself ready 
to go out of town to a school, and Caddy ran away to get ready to 
go out with me.  I sat in the ball-room in the interval, 
contemplating the apprentices.  The two out-door boys went upon the 
staircase to put on their half-boots and pull the in-door boy's 
hair, as I judged from the nature of his objections.  Returning 
with their jackets buttoned and their pumps stuck in them, they 
then produced packets of cold bread and meat and bivouacked under a 
painted lyre on the wall.  The little gauzy child, having whisked 
her sandals into the reticule and put on a trodden-down pair of 
shoes, shook her head into the dowdy bonnet at one shake, and 
answering my inquiry whether she liked dancing by replying, "Not 
with boys," tied it across her chin, and went home contemptuous.

"Old Mr. Turveydrop is so sorry," said Caddy, "that he has not 
finished dressing yet and cannot have the pleasure of seeing you 
before you go.  You are such a favourite of his, Esther."

I expressed myself much obliged to him, but did not think it 
necessary to add that I readily dispensed with this attention.

"It takes him a long time to dress," said Caddy, "because he is 
very much looked up to in such things, you know, and has a 
reputation to support.  You can't think how kind he is to Pa.  He 
talks to Pa of an evening about the Prince Regent, and I never saw 
Pa so interested."

There was something in the picture of Mr. Turveydrop bestowing his 
deportment on Mr. Jellyby that quite took my fancy.  I asked Caddy 
if he brought her papa out much.

"No," said Caddy, "I don't know that he does that, but he talks to 
Pa, and Pa greatly admires him, and listens, and likes it.  Of 
course I am aware that Pa has hardly any claims to deportment, but 
they get on together delightfully.  You can't think what good 
companions they make.  I never saw Pa take snuff before in my life, 
but he takes one pinch out of Mr. Turveydrop's box regularly and 
keeps putting it to his nose and taking it away again all the 
evening."

That old Mr. Turveydrop should ever, in the chances and changes of 
life, have come to the rescue of Mr. Jellyby from Borrioboola-Gha 
appeared to me to be one of the pleasantest of oddities.

"As to Peepy," said Caddy with a little hesitation, "whom I was 
most afraid of--next to having any family of my own, Esther--as an 
inconvenience to Mr. Turveydrop, the kindness of the old gentleman 
to that child is beyond everything.  He asks to see him, my dear!  
He lets him take the newspaper up to him in bed; he gives him the 
crusts of his toast to eat; he sends him on little errands about 
the house; he tells him to come to me for sixpences.  In short," 
said Caddy cheerily, "and not to prose, I am a very fortunate girl 
and ought to be very grateful.  Where are we going, Esther?"

"To the Old Street Road," said I, "where I have a few words to say 
to the solicitor's clerk who was sent to meet me at the coach-
office on the very day when I came to London and first saw you, my 
dear.  Now I think of it, the gentleman who brought us to your 
house."

"Then, indeed, I seem to be naturally the person to go with you," 
returned Caddy.

To the Old Street Road we went and there inquired at Mrs. Guppy's 
residence for Mrs. Guppy.  Mrs. Guppy, occupying the parlours and 
having indeed been visibly in danger of cracking herself like a nut 
in the front-parlour door by peeping out before she was asked for, 
immediately presented herself and requested us to walk in.  She was 
an old lady in a large cap, with rather a red nose and rather an 
unsteady eye, but smiling all over.  Her close little sitting-room 
was prepared for a visit, and there was a portrait of her son in it 
which, I had almost written here, was more like than life: it 
insisted upon him with such obstinacy, and was so determined not to 
let him off.

Not only was the portrait there, but we found the original there 
too.  He was dressed in a great many colours and was discovered at 
a table reading law-papers with his forefinger to his forehead.

"Miss Summerson," said Mr. Guppy, rising, "this is indeed an oasis.  
Mother, will you be so good as to put a chair for the other lady 
and get out of the gangway."

Mrs. Guppy, whose incessant smiling gave her quite a waggish 
appearance, did as her son requested and then sat down in a corner, 
holding her pocket handkerchief to her chest, like a fomentation, 
with both hands.

I presented Caddy, and Mr. Guppy said that any friend of mine was 
more than welcome.  I then proceeded to the object of my visit.

"I took the liberty of sending you a note, sir," said I.

Mr. Guppy acknowledged the receipt by taking it out of his breast-
pocket, putting it to his lips, and returning it to his pocket with 
a bow.  Mr. Guppy's mother was so diverted that she rolled her head 
as she smiled and made a silent appeal to Caddy with her elbow.

"Could I speak to you alone for a moment?" said I.

Anything like the jocoseness of Mr. Guppy's mother just now, I 
think I never saw.  She made no sound of laughter, but she rolled 
her head, and shook it, and put her handkerchief to her mouth, and 
appealed to Caddy with her elbow, and her hand, and her shoulder, 
and was so unspeakably entertained altogether that it was with some 
difficulty she could marshal Caddy through the little folding-door 
into her bedroom adjoining.

"Miss Summerson," said Mr. Guppy, "you will excuse the waywardness 
of a parent ever mindful of a son's appiness.  My mother, though 
highly exasperating to the feelings, is actuated by maternal 
dictates."

I could hardly have believed that anybody could in a moment have 
turned so red or changed so much as Mr. Guppy did when I now put up 
my veil.

"I asked the favour of seeing you for a few moments here," said I, 
"in preference to calling at Mr. Kenge's because, remembering what 
you said on an occasion when you spoke to me in confidence, I 
feared I might otherwise cause you some embarrassment, Mr. Guppy."

I caused him embarrassment enough as it was, I am sure.  I never 
saw such faltering, such confusion, such amazement and 
apprehension.

"Miss Summerson," stammered Mr. Guppy, "I--I--beg your pardon, but 
in our profession--we--we--find it necessary to be explicit.  You 
have referred to an occasion, miss, when I--when I did myself the 
honour of making a declaration which--"

Something seemed to rise in his throat that he could not possibly 
swallow.  He put his hand there, coughed, made faces, tried again 
to swallow it, coughed again, made faces again, looked all round 
the room, and fluttered his papers.

"A kind of giddy sensation has come upon me, miss," he explained, 
"which rather knocks me over.  I--er--a little subject to this sort 
of thing--er--by George!"

I gave him a little time to recover.  He consumed it in putting his 
hand to his forehead and taking it away again, and in backing his 
chair into the corner behind him.

"My intention was to remark, miss," said Mr. Guppy, "dear me--
something bronchial, I think--hem!--to remark that you was so good 
on that occasion as to repel and repudiate that declaration.  You--
you wouldn't perhaps object to admit that?  Though no witnesses are 
present, it might be a satisfaction to--to your mind--if you was to 
put in that admission."

"There can be no doubt," said I, "that I declined your proposal 
without any reservation or qualification whatever, Mr. Guppy."

"Thank you, miss," he returned, measuring the table with his 
troubled hands.  "So far that's satisfactory, and it does you 
credit.  Er--this is certainly bronchial!--must be in the tubes--
er--you wouldn't perhaps be offended if I was to mention--not that 
it's necessary, for your own good sense or any person's sense must 
show 'em that--if I was to mention that such declaration on my part 
was final, and there terminated?"

"I quite understand that," said I.

"Perhaps--er--it may not be worth the form, but it might be a 
satisfaction to your mind--perhaps you wouldn't object to admit 
that, miss?" said Mr. Guppy.

"I admit it most fully and freely," said I.

"Thank you," returned Mr. Guppy.  "Very honourable, I am sure.  I 
regret that my arrangements in life, combined with circumstances 
over which I have no control, will put it out of my power ever to 
fall back upon that offer or to renew it in any shape or form 
whatever, but it will ever be a retrospect entwined--er--with 
friendship's bowers."  Mr. Guppy's bronchitis came to his relief 
and stopped his measurement of the table.

"I may now perhaps mention what I wished to say to you?" I began.

"I shall be honoured, I am sure," said Mr. Guppy.  "I am so 
persuaded that your own good sense and right feeling, miss, will--
will keep you as square as possible--that I can have nothing but 
pleasure, I am sure, in hearing any observations you may wish to 
offer."

"You were so good as to imply, on that occasion--"

"Excuse me, miss," said Mr. Guppy, "but we had better not travel 
out of the record into implication.  I cannot admit that I implied 
anything."

"You said on that occasion," I recommenced, "that you might 
possibly have the means of advancing my interests and promoting my 
fortunes by making discoveries of which I should be the subject.  I 
presume that you founded that belief upon your general knowledge of 
my being an orphan girl, indebted for everything to the benevolence 
of Mr. Jarndyce.  Now, the beginning and the end of what I have 
come to beg of you is, Mr. Guppy, that you will have the kindness 
to relinquish all idea of so serving me.  I have thought of this 
sometimes, and I have thought of it most lately--since I have been 
ill.  At length I have decided, in case you should at any time 
recall that purpose and act upon it in any way, to come to you and 
assure you that you are altogether mistaken.  You could make no 
discovery in reference to me that would do me the least service or 
give me the least pleasure.  I am acquainted with my personal 
history, and I have it in my power to assure you that you never can 
advance my welfare by such means.  You may, perhaps, have abandoned 
this project a long time.  If so, excuse my giving you unnecessary 
trouble.  If not, I entreat you, on the assurance I have given you, 
henceforth to lay it aside.  I beg you to do this, for my peace."

"I am bound to confess," said Mr. Guppy, "that you express 
yourself, miss, with that good sense and right feeling for which I 
gave you credit.  Nothing can be more satisfactory than such right 
feeling, and if I mistook any intentions on your part just now, I 
am prepared to tender a full apology.  I should wish to be 
understood, miss, as hereby offering that apology--limiting it, as 
your own good sense and right feeling will point out the necessity 
of, to the present proceedings."

I must say for Mr. Guppy that the snuffling manner he had had upon 
him improved very much.  He seemed truly glad to be able to do 
something I asked, and he looked ashamed.

"If you will allow me to finish what I have to say at once so that 
I may have no occasion to resume," I went on, seeing him about to 
speak, "you will do me a kindness, sir.  I come to you as privately 
as possible because you announced this impression of yours to me in 
a confidence which I have really wished to respect--and which I 
always have respected, as you remember.  I have mentioned my 
illness.  There really is no reason why I should hesitate to say 
that I know very well that any little delicacy I might have had in 
making a request to you is quite removed.  Therefore I make the 
entreaty I have now preferred, and I hope you will have sufficient 
consideration for me to accede to it."

I must do Mr. Guppy the further justice of saying that he had 
looked more and more ashamed and that he looked most ashamed and 
very earnest when he now replied with a burning face, "Upon my word 
and honour, upon my life, upon my soul, Miss Summerson, as I am a 
living man, I'll act according to your wish!  I'll never go another 
step in opposition to it.  I'll take my oath to it if it will be 
any satisfaction to you.  In what I promise at this present time 
touching the matters now in question," continued Mr. Guppy rapidly, 
as if he were repeating a familiar form of words, "I speak the 
truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so--"

"I am quite satisfied," said I, rising at this point, "and I thank 
you very much.  Caddy, my dear, I am ready!"

Mr. Guppy's mother returned with Caddy (now making me the recipient 
of her silent laughter and her nudges), and we took our leave.  Mr. 
Guppy saw us to the door with the air of one who was either 
imperfectly awake or walking in his sleep; and we left him there, 
staring.

But in a minute he came after us down the street without any hat, 
and with his long hair all blown about, and stopped us, saying 
fervently, "Miss Summerson, upon my honour and soul, you may depend 
upon me!"

"I do," said I, "quite confidently."

"I beg your pardon, miss," said Mr. Guppy, going with one leg and 
staying with the other, "but this lady being present--your own 
witness--it might be a satisfaction to your mind (which I should 
wish to set at rest) if you was to repeat those admissions."

"Well, Caddy," said I, turning to her, "perhaps you will not be 
surprised when I tell you, my dear, that there never has been any 
engagement--"

"No proposal or promise of marriage whatsoever," suggested Mr. 
Guppy.

"No proposal or promise of marriage whatsoever," said I, "between 
this gentleman--"

"William Guppy, of Penton Place, Pentonville, in the county of 
Middlesex," he murmured.

"Between this gentleman, Mr. William Guppy, of Penton Place, 
Pentonville, in the county of Middlesex, and myself."

"Thank you, miss," said Mr. Guppy.  "Very full--er--excuse me--
lady's name, Christian and surname both?"

I gave them.

"Married woman, I believe?" said Mr. Guppy.  "Married woman.  Thank 
you.  Formerly Caroline Jellyby, spinster, then of Thavies Inn, 
within the city of London, but extra-parochial; now of Newman 
Street, Oxford Street.  Much obliged."

He ran home and came running back again.

"Touching that matter, you know, I really and truly am very sorry 
that my arrangements in life, combined with circumstances over 
which I have no control, should prevent a renewal of what was 
wholly terminated some time back," said Mr. Guppy to me forlornly 
and despondently, "but it couldn't be.  Now COULD it, you know!  I 
only put it to you."

I replied it certainly could not.  The subject did not admit of a 
doubt.  He thanked me and ran to his mother's again--and back 
again.

"It's very honourable of you, miss, I am sure," said Mr. Guppy.  
"If an altar could be erected in the bowers of friendship--but, 
upon my soul, you may rely upon me in every respect save and except 
the tender passion only!"

The struggle in Mr. Guppy's breast and the numerous oscillations it 
occasioned him between his mother's door and us were sufficiently 
conspicuous in the windy street (particularly as his hair wanted 
cutting) to make us hurry away.  I did so with a lightened heart; 
but when we last looked back, Mr. Guppy was still oscillating in 
the same troubled state of mind.



CHAPTER XXXIX

Attorney and Client


The name of Mr. Vholes, preceded by the legend Ground-Floor, is 
inscribed upon a door-post in Symond's Inn, Chancery Lane--a 
little, pale, wall-eyed, woebegone inn like a large dust-binn of 
two compartments and a sifter.  It looks as if Symond were a 
sparing man in his way and constructed his inn of old building 
materials which took kindly to the dry rot and to dirt and all 
things decaying and dismal, and perpetuated Symond's memory with 
congenial shabbiness.  Quartered in this dingy hatchment 
commemorative of Symond are the legal bearings of Mr. Vholes.

Mr. Vholes's office, in disposition retiring and in situation 
retired, is squeezed up in a corner and blinks at a dead wall.  
Three feet of knotty-floored dark passage bring the client to Mr. 
Vholes's jet-black door, in an angle profoundly dark on the 
brightest midsummer morning and encumbered by a black bulk-head of 
cellarage staircase against which belated civilians generally 
strike their brows.  Mr. Vholes's chambers are on so small a scale 
that one clerk can open the door without getting off his stool, 
while the other who elbows him at the same desk has equal 
facilities for poking the fire.  A smell as of unwholesome sheep 
blending with the smell of must and dust is referable to the 
nightly (and often daily) consumption of mutton fat in candles and 
to the fretting of parchment forms and skins in greasy drawers.  
The atmosphere is otherwise stale and close.  The place was last 
painted or whitewashed beyond the memory of man, and the two 
chimneys smoke, and there is a loose outer surface of soot 
evervwhere, and the dull cracked windows in their heavy frames have 
but one piece of character in them, which is a determination to be 
always dirty and always shut unless coerced.  This accounts for the 
phenomenon of the weaker of the two usually having a bundle of 
firewood thrust between its jaws in hot weather.

Mr. Vholes is a very respectable man.  He has not a large business, 
but he is a very respectable man.  He is allowed by the greater 
attorneys who have made good fortunes or are making them to be a 
most respectable man.  He never misses a chance in his practice, 
which is a mark of respectability.  He never takes any pleasure, 
which is another mark of respectability.  He is reserved and 
serious, which is another mark of respectability.  His digestion is 
impaired, which is highly respectable.  And he is making hay of the 
grass which is flesh, for his three daughters.  And his father is 
dependent on him in the Vale of Taunton.

The one great principle of the English law is to make business for 
itself.  There is no other principle distinctly, certainly, and 
consistently maintained through all its narrow turnings.  Viewed by 
this light it becomes a coherent scheme and not the monstrous maze 
the laity are apt to think it.  Let them but once clearly perceive 
that its grand principle is to make business for itself at their 
expense, and surely they will cease to grumble.

But not perceiving this quite plainly--only seeing it by halves in 
a confused way--the laity sometimes suffer in peace and pocket, 
with a bad grace, and DO grumble very much.  Then this 
respectability of Mr. Vholes is brought into powerful play against 
them.  "Repeal this statute, my good sir?" says Mr. Kenge to a 
smarting client.  "Repeal it, my dear sir?  Never, with my consent.  
Alter this law, sir, and what will be the effect of your rash 
proceeding on a class of practitioners very worthily represented, 
allow me to say to you, by the opposite attorney in the case, Mr. 
Vholes?  Sir, that class of practitioners would be swept from the 
face of the earth.  Now you cannot afford--I will say, the social 
system cannot afford--to lose an order of men like Mr. Vholes.  
Diligent, persevering, steady, acute in business.  My dear sir, I 
understand your present feelings against the existing state of 
things, which I grant to be a little hard in your case; but I can 
never raise my voice for the demolition of a class of men like Mr. 
Vholes."  The respectability of Mr. Vholes has even been cited with 
crushing effect before Parliamentary committees, as in the 
following blue minutes of a distinguished attorney's evidence.   
"Question (number five hundred and seventeen thousand eight hundred 
and sixty-nine): If I understand you, these forms of practice 
indisputably occasion delay?  Answer: Yes, some delay.  Question: 
And great expense?  Answer: Most assuredly they cannot be gone 
through for nothing.  Question: And unspeakable vexation?  Answer: 
I am not prepared to say that.  They have never given ME any 
vexation; quite the contrary.  Question: But you think that their 
abolition would damage a class of practitioners?  Answer: I have no 
doubt of it.  Question: Can you instance any type of that class?  
Answer: Yes.  I would unhesitatingly mention Mr. Vholes.  He would 
be ruined.  Question: Mr. Vholes is considered, in the profession, 
a respectable man?  Answer: "--which proved fatal to the inquiry 
for ten years--"Mr. Vholes is considered, in the profession, a MOST 
respectable man."

So in familiar conversation, private authorities no less 
disinterested will remark that they don't know what this age is 
coming to, that we are plunging down precipices, that now here is 
something else gone, that these changes are death to people like 
Vholes--a man of undoubted respectability, with a father in the 
Vale of Taunton, and three daughters at home.  Take a few steps 
more in this direction, say they, and what is to become of Vholes's 
father?  Is he to perish?  And of Vholes's daughters?  Are they to 
be shirt-makers, or governesses?  As though, Mr. Vholes and his 
relations being minor cannibal chiefs and it being proposed to 
abolish cannibalism, indignant champions were to put the case thus: 
Make man-eating unlawful, and you starve the Vholeses!

In a word, Mr. Vholes, with his three daughters and his father in 
the Vale of Taunton, is continually doing duty, like a piece of 
timber, to shore up some decayed foundation that has become a 
pitfall and a nuisance.  And with a great many people in a great 
many instances, the question is never one of a change from wrong to 
right (which is quite an extraneous consideration), but is always 
one of injury or advantage to that eminently respectable legion, 
Vholes.

The Chancellor is, within these ten minutes, "up" for the long 
vacation.  Mr. Vholes, and his young client, and several blue bags 
hastily stuffed out of all regularity of form, as the larger sort 
of serpents are in their first gorged state, have returned to the 
official den.  Mr. Vholes, quiet and unmoved, as a man of so much 
respectability ought to be, takes off his close black gloves as if 
he were skinning his hands, lifts off his tight hat as if he were 
scalping himself, and sits down at his desk.  The client throws his 
hat and gloves upon the ground--tosses them anywhere, without 
looking after them or caring where they go; flings himself into a 
chair, half sighing and half groaning; rests his aching head upon 
his hand and looks the portrait of young despair.

"Again nothing done!" says Richard.  "Nothing, nothing done!"

"Don't say nothing done, sir," returns the placid Vholes.  "That is 
scarcely fair, sir, scarcely fair!"

"Why, what IS done?" says Richard, turning gloomily upon him.

"That may not be the whole question," returns Vholes, "The question 
may branch off into what is doing, what is doing?"

"And what is doing?" asks the moody client.

Vholes, sitting with his arms on the desk, quietly bringing the 
tips of his five right fingers to meet the tips of his five left 
fingers, and quietly separating them again, and fixedly and slowly 
looking at his client, replies, "A good deal is doing, sir.  We 
have put our shoulders to the wheel, Mr. Carstone, and the wheel is 
going round."

"Yes, with Ixion on it.  How am I to get through the next four or 
five accursed months?" exclaims the young man, rising from his 
chair and walking about the room.

"Mr. C.," returns Vholes, following him close with his eyes 
wherever he goes, "your spirits are hasty, and I am sorry for it on 
your account.  Excuse me if I recommend you not to chafe so much, 
not to be so impetuous, not to wear yourself out so.  You should 
have more patience.  You should sustain yourself better."

"I ought to imitate you, in fact, Mr. Vholes?" says Richard, 
sitting down again with an impatient laugh and beating the devil's 
tattoo with his boot on the patternless carpet.

"Sir," returns Vholes, always looking at the client as if he were 
making a lingering meal of him with his eyes as well as with his 
professional appetite.  "Sir," returns Vholes with his inward 
manner of speech and his bloodless quietude, "I should not have had 
the presumption to propose myself as a model for your imitation or 
any man's.  Let me but leave the good name to my three daughters, 
and that is enough for me; I am not a self-seeker.  But since you 
mention me so pointedly, I will acknowledge that I should like to 
impart to you a little of my--come, sir, you are disposed to call 
it insensibility, and I am sure I have no objection--say 
insensibility--a little of my insensibility."

"Mr. Vholes," explains the client, somewhat abashed, "I had no 
intention to accuse you of insensibility."

"I think you had, sir, without knowing it," returns the equable 
Vholes.  "Very naturally.  It is my duty to attend to your 
interests with a cool head, and I can quite understand that to your 
excited feelings I may appear, at such times as the present, 
insensible.  My daughters may know me better; my aged father may 
know me better.  But they have known me much longer than you have, 
and the confiding eye of affection is not the distrustful eye of 
business.  Not that I complain, sir, of the eye of business being 
distrustful; quite the contrary.  In attending to your interests, I 
wish to have all possible checks upon me; it is right that I should 
have them; I court inquiry.  But your interests demand that I 
should be cool and methodical, Mr. Carstone; and I cannot be 
otherwise--no, sir, not even to please you."

Mr. Vholes, after glancing at the official cat who is patiently 
watching a mouse's hole, fixes his charmed gaze again on his young 
client and proceeds in his buttoned-up, half-audible voice as if 
there were an unclean spirit in him that will neither come out nor 
speak out, "What are you to do, sir, you inquire, during the 
vacation.  I should hope you gentlemen of the army may find many 
means of amusing yourselves if you give your minds to it.  If you 
had asked me what I was to do during the vacation, I could have 
answered you more readily.  I am to attend to your interests.  I am 
to be found here, day by day, attending to your interests.  That is 
my duty, Mr. C., and term-time or vacation makes no difference to 
me.  If you wish to consult me as to your interests, you will find 
me here at all times alike.  Other professional men go out of town.  
I don't.  Not that I blame them for going; I merely say I don't go.  
This desk is your rock, sir!"

Mr. Vholes gives it a rap, and it sounds as hollow as a coffin.  
Not to Richard, though.  There is encouragement in the sound to 
him.  Perhaps Mr. Vholes knows there is.

"I am perfectly aware, Mr. Vholes," says Richard, more familiarly 
and good-humouredly, "that you are the most reliable fellow in the 
world and that to have to do with you is to have to do with a man 
of business who is not to be hoodwinked.  But put yourself in my 
case, dragging on this dislocated life, sinking deeper and deeper 
into difficulty every day, continually hoping and continually 
disappointed, conscious of change upon change for the worse in 
myself, and of no change for the better in anything else, and you 
will find it a dark-looking case sometimes, as I do."

"You know," says Mr. Vholes, "that I never give hopes, sir.  I told 
you from the first, Mr. C., that I never give hopes.  Particularly 
in a case like this, where the greater part of the costs comes out 
of the estate, I should not be considerate of my good name if I 
gave hopes.  It might seem as if costs were my object.  Still, when 
you say there is no change for the better, I must, as a bare matter 
of fact, deny that."

"Aye?" returns Richard, brightening.  "But how do you make it out?"

"Mr. Carstone, you are represented by--"

"You said just now--a rock."

"Yes, sir," says Mr. Vholes, gently shaking his head and rapping 
the hollow desk, with a sound as if ashes were falling on ashes, 
and dust on dust, "a rock.  That's something.  You are separately 
represented, and no longer hidden and lost in the interests of 
others.  THAT'S something.  The suit does not sleep; we wake it up, 
we air it, we walk it about.  THAT'S something.  It's not all 
Jarndyce, in fact as well as in name.  THAT'S something.  Nobody 
has it all his own way now, sir.  And THAT'S something, surely."

Richard, his face flushing suddenly, strikes the desk with his 
clenched hand.

"Mr. Vholes!  If any man had told me when I first went to John 
Jarndyce's house that he was anything but the disinterested friend 
he seemed--that he was what he has gradually turned out to be--I 
could have found no words strong enough to repel the slander; I 
could not have defended him too ardently.  So little did I know of 
the world!  Whereas now I do declare to you that he becomes to me 
the embodiment of the suit; that in place of its being an 
abstraction, it is John Jarndyce; that the more I suffer, the more 
indignant I am with him; that every new delay and every new 
disappointment is only a new injury from John Jarndyce's hand."

"No, no," says vholes.  "Don't say so.  We ought to have patience, 
all of us.  Besides, I never disparage, sir.  I never disparage."

"Mr. Vholes," returns the angry client.  "You know as well as I 
that he would have strangled the suit if he could."

"He was not active in it," Mr. Vholes admits with an appearance of 
reluctance.  "He certainly was not active in it.  But however, but 
however, he might have had amiable intentions.  Who can read the 
heart, Mr. C.!"

"You can," returns Richard.

"I, Mr. C.?"

"Well enough to know what his intentions were.  Are or are not our 
interests conflicting?  Tell--me--that!" says Richard, accompanying 
his last three words with three raps on his rock of trust.

"Mr. C.," returns Vholes, immovable in attitude and never winking 
his hungry eyes, "I should be wanting in my duty as your 
professional adviser, I should be departing from my fidelity to 
your interests, if I represented those interests as identical with 
the interests of Mr. Jarndyce.  They are no such thing, sir.  I 
never impute motives; I both have and am a father, and I never 
impute motives.  But I must not shrink from a professional duty, 
even if it sows dissensions in families.  I understand you to be 
now consulting me professionally as to your interests?  You are so?  
I reply, then, they are not identical with those of Mr. Jarndyce."

"Of course they are not!" cries Richard.  "You found that out long 
ago."

"Mr. C.," returns Vholes, "I wish to say no more of any third party 
than is necessary.  I wish to leave my good name unsullied, 
together with any little property of which I may become possessed 
through industry and perseverance, to my daughters Emma, Jane, and 
Caroline.  I also desire to live in amity with my professional 
brethren.  When Mr. Skimpole did me the honour, sir--I will not say 
the very high honour, for I never stoop to flattery--of bringing us 
together in this room, I mentioned to you that I could offer no 
opinion or advice as to your interests while those interests were 
entrusted to another member of the profession.  And I spoke in such 
terms as I was bound to speak of Kenge and Carboy's office, which 
stands high.  You, sir, thought fit to withdraw your interests from 
that keeping nevertheless and to offer them to me.  You brought 
them with clean hands, sir, and I accepted them with clean hands.  
Those interests are now paramount in this office.  My digestive 
functions, as you may have heard me mention, are not in a good 
state, and rest might improve them; but I shall not rest, sir, 
while I am your representative.  Whenever you want me, you will 
find me here.  Summon me anywhere, and I will come.  During the 
long vacation, sir, I shall devote my leisure to studying your 
interests more and more closely and to making arrangements for 
moving heaven and earth (including, of course, the Chancellor) 
after Michaelmas term; and when I ultimately congratulate you, 
sir," says Mr. Vholes with the severity of a determined man, "when 
I ultimately congratulate you, sir, with all my heart, on your 
accession to fortune--which, but that I never give hopes, I might 
say something further about--you will owe me nothing beyond 
whatever little balance may be then outstanding of the costs as 
between solicitor and client not included in the taxed costs 
allowed out of the estate.  I pretend to no claim upon you, Mr. C., 
but for the zealous and active discharge--not the languid and 
routine discharge, sir: that much credit I stipulate for--of my 
professional duty.  My duty prosperously ended, all between us is 
ended."

Vholes finally adds, by way of rider to this declaration of his 
principles, that as Mr. Carstone is about to rejoin his regiment, 
perhaps Mr. C. will favour him with an order on his agent for 
twenty pounds on account.

"For there have been many little consultations and attendances of 
late, sir," observes Vholes, turning over the leaves of his diary, 
"and these things mount up, and I don't profess to be a man of 
capital.  When we first entered on our present relations I stated 
to you openly--it is a principle of mine that there never can be 
too much openness between solicitor and client--that I was not a 
man of capital and that if capital was your object you had better 
leave your papers in Kenge's office.  No, Mr. C., you will find 
none of the advantages or disadvantages of capital here, sir.  
This," Vholes gives the desk one hollow blow again, "is your rock; 
it pretends to be nothing more."

The client, with his dejection insensibly relieved and his vague 
hopes rekindled, takes pen and ink and writes the draft, not 
without perplexed consideration and calculation of the date it may 
bear, implying scant effects in the agent's hands.  All the while, 
Vholes, buttoned up in body and mind, looks at him attentively.  
All the while, Vholes's official cat watches the mouse's hole.

Lastly, the client, shaking hands, beseeches Mr. Vholes, for 
heaven's sake and earth's sake, to do his utmost to "pull him 
through" the Court of Chancery.  Mr. Vholes, who never gives hopes, 
lays his palm upon the client's shoulder and answers with a smile, 
"Always here, sir.  Personally, or by letter, you will always find 
me here, sir, with my shoulder to the wheel."  Thus they part, and 
Vholes, left alone, employs himself in carrying sundry little 
matters out of his diary into his draft bill book for the ultimate 
behoof of his three daughters.  So might an industrious fox or bear 
make up his account of chickens or stray travellers with an eye to 
his cubs, not to disparage by that word the three raw-visaged, 
lank, and buttoned-up maidens who dwell with the parent Vholes in 
an earthy cottage situated in a damp garden at Kennington.

Richard, emerging from the heavy shade of Symond's Inn into the 
sunshine of Chancery Lane--for there happens to be sunshine there 
to-day--walks thoughtfully on, and turns into Lincoln's Inn, and 
passes under the shadow of the Lincoln's Inn trees.  On many such 
loungers have the speckled shadows of those trees often fallen; on 
the like bent head, the bitten nail, the lowering eye, the 
lingering step, the purposeless and dreamy air, the good consuming 
and consumed, the life turned sour.  This lounger is not shabby 
yet, but that may come.  Chancery, which knows no wisdom but in 
precedent, is very rich in such precedents; and why should one be 
different from ten thousand?

Yet the time is so short since his depreciation began that as he 
saunters away, reluctant to leave the spot for some long months 
together, though he hates it, Richard himself may feel his own case 
as if it were a startling one.  While his heart is heavy with 
corroding care, suspense, distrust, and doubt, it may have room for 
some sorrowful wonder when he recalls how different his first visit 
there, how different he, how different all the colours of his mind.  
But injustice breeds injustice; the fighting with shadows and being 
defeated by them necessitates the setting up of substances to 
combat; from the impalpable suit which no man alive can understand, 
the time for that being long gone by, it has become a gloomy relief 
to turn to the palpable figure of the friend who would have saved 
him from this ruin and make HIM his enemy.  Richard has told Vholes 
the truth.  Is he in a hardened or a softened mood, he still lays 
his injuries equally at that door; he was thwarted, in that 
quarter, of a set purpose, and that purpose could only originate in 
the one subject that is resolving his existence into itself; 
besides, it is a justification to him in his own eyes to have an 
embodied antagonist and oppressor.

Is Richard a monster in all this, or would Chancery be found rich 
in such precedents too if they could be got for citation from the 
Recording Angel?

Two pairs of eyes not unused to such people look after him, as, 
biting his nails and brooding, he crosses the square and is 
swallowed up by the shadow of the southern gateway.  Mr. Guppy and 
Mr. Weevle are the possessors of those eyes, and they have been 
leaning in conversation against the low stone parapet under the 
trees.  He passes close by them, seeing nothing but the ground.

"William," says Mr. Weevle, adjusting his whiskers, "there's 
combustion going on there!  It's not a case of spontaneous, but 
it's smouldering combustion it is."

"Ah!" says Mr. Guppy.  "He wouldn't keep out of Jarndyce, and I 
suppose he's over head and ears in debt.  I never knew much of him.  
He was as high as the monument when he was on trial at our place.  
A good riddance to me, whether as clerk or client!  Well, Tony, 
that as I was mentioning is what they're up to."

Mr. Guppy, refolding his arms, resettles himself against the 
parapet, as resuming a conversation of interest.

"They are still up to it, sir," says Mr. Guppy, "still taking 
stock, still examining papers, still going over the heaps and heaps 
of rubbish.  At this rate they'll be at it these seven years."

"And Small is helping?"

"Small left us at a week's notice.  Told Kenge his grandfather's 
business was too much for the old gentleman and he could better 
himself by undertaking it.  There had been a coolness between 
myself and Small on account of his being so close.  But he said you 
and I began it, and as he had me there--for we did--I put our 
acquaintance on the old footing.  That's how I come to know what 
they're up to."

"You haven't looked in at all?"

"Tony," says Mr. Guppy, a little disconcerted, "to be unreserved 
with you, I don't greatly relish the house, except in your company, 
and therefore I have not; and therefore I proposed this little 
appointment for our fetching away your things.  There goes the hour 
by the clock!  Tony"--Mr. Guppy becomes mysteriously and tenderly 
eloquent--"it is necessary that I should impress upon your mind 
once more that circumstances over which I have no control have made 
a melancholy alteration in my most cherished plans and in that 
unrequited image which I formerly mentioned to you as a friend.  
That image is shattered, and that idol is laid low.  My only wish 
now in connexion with the objects which I had an idea of carrying 
out in the court with your aid as a friend is to let 'em alone and 
bury 'em in oblivion.  Do you think it possible, do you think it at 
all likely (I put it to you, Tony, as a friend), from your 
knowledge of that capricious and deep old character who fell a prey 
to the--spontaneous element, do you, Tony, think it at all likely 
that on second thoughts he put those letters away anywhere, after 
you saw him alive, and that they were not destroyed that night?"

Mr. Weevle reflects for some time.  Shakes his head.  Decidedly 
thinks not.

"Tony," says Mr. Guppy as they walk towards the court, "once again 
understand me, as a friend.  Without entering into further 
explanations, I may repeat that the idol is down.  I have no 
purpose to serve now but burial in oblivion.  To that I have 
pledged myself.  I owe it to myself, and I owe it to the shattered 
image, as also to the circumstances over which I have no control.  
If you was to express to me by a gesture, by a wink, that you saw 
lying anywhere in your late lodgings any papers that so much as 
looked like the papers in question, I would pitch them into the 
fire, sir, on my own responsibility."

Mr. Weevle nods.  Mr. Guppy, much elevated in his own opinion by 
having delivered these observations, with an air in part forensic 
and in part romantic--this gentleman having a passion for 
conducting anything in the form of an examination, or delivering 
anything in the form of a summing up or a speech--accompanies his 
friend with dignity to the court.

Never since it has been a court has it had such a Fortunatus' purse 
of gossip as in the proceedings at the rag and bottle shop.  
Regularly, every morning at eight, is the elder Mr. Smallweed 
brought down to the corner and carried in, accompanied by Mrs. 
Smallweed, Judy, and Bart; and regularly, all day, do they all 
remain there until nine at night, solaced by gipsy dinners, not 
abundant in quantity, from the cook's shop, rummaging and 
searching, digging, delving, and diving among the treasures of the 
late lamented.  What those treasures are they keep so secret that 
the court is maddened.  In its delirium it imagines guineas pouring 
out of tea-pots, crown-pieces overflowing punch-bowls, old chairs 
and mattresses stuffed with Bank of England notes.  It possesses 
itself of the sixpenny history (with highly coloured folding 
frontispiece) of Mr. Daniel Dancer and his sister, and also of Mr. 
Elwes, of Suffolk, and transfers all the facts from those authentic 
narratives to Mr. Krook.  Twice when the dustman is called in to 
carry off a cartload of old paper, ashes, and broken bottles, the 
whole court assembles and pries into the baskets as they come 
forth.  Many times the two gentlemen who write with the ravenous 
little pens on the tissue-paper are seen prowling in the 
neighbourhood--shy of each other, their late partnership being 
dissolved.  The Sol skilfully carries a vein of the prevailing 
interest through the Harmonic nights.  Little Swills, in what are 
professionally known as "patter" allusions to the subject, is 
received with loud applause; and the same vocalist "gags" in the 
regular business like a man inspired.  Even Miss M. Melvilleson, in 
the revived Caledonian melody of "We're a-Nodding," points the 
sentiment that "the dogs love broo" (whatever the nature of that 
refreshment may be) with such archness and such a turn of the head 
towards next door that she is immediately understood to mean Mr. 
Smallweed loves to find money, and is nightly honoured with a 
double encore.  For all this, the court discovers nothing; and as 
Mrs. Piper and Mrs. Perkins now communicate to the late lodger whose 
appearance is the signal for a general rally, it is in one 
continual ferment to discover everything, and more.

Mr. Weevle and Mr. Guppy, with every eye in the court's head upon 
them, knock at the closed door of the late lamented's house, in a 
high state of popularity.  But being contrary to the court's 
expectation admitted, they immediately become unpopular and are 
considered to mean no good.

The shutters are more or less closed all over the house, and the 
ground-floor is sufficiently dark to require candles.  Introduced 
into the back shop by Mr. Smallweed the younger, they, fresh from 
the sunlight, can at first see nothing save darkness and shadows; 
but they gradually discern the elder Mr. Smallweed seated in his 
chair upon the brink of a well or grave of waste-paper, the 
virtuous Judy groping therein like a female sexton, and Mrs. 
Smallweed on the level ground in the vicinity snowed up in a heap 
of paper fragments, print, and manuscript which would appear to be 
the accumulated compliments that have been sent flying at her in 
the course of the day.  The whole party, Small included, are 
blackened with dust and dirt and present a fiendish appearance not 
relieved by the general aspect of the room.  There is more litter 
and lumber in it than of old, and it is dirtier if possible; 
likewise, it is ghostly with traces of its dead inhabitant and even 
with his chalked writing on the wall.

On the entrance of visitors, Mr. Smallweed and Judy simultaneously 
fold their arms and stop in their researches.

"Aha!" croaks the old gentleman.  "How de do, gentlemen, how de do!  
Come to fetch your property, Mr. Weevle?  That's well, that's well.  
Ha! Ha!  We should have been forced to sell you up, sir, to pay 
your warehouse room if you had left it here much longer.  You feel 
quite at home here again, I dare say?  Glad to see you, glad to see 
you!"

Mr. Weevle, thanking him, casts an eye about.  Mr. Guppy's eye 
follows Mr. Weevle's eye.  Mr. Weevle's eye comes back without any 
new intelligence in it.  Mr. Guppy's eye comes back and meets Mr. 
Smallweed's eye.  That engaging old gentleman is still murmuring, 
like some wound-up instrument running down, "How de do, sir--how 
de--how--"  And then having run down, he lapses into grinning 
silence, as Mr. Guppy starts at seeing Mr. Tulkinghorn standing in 
the darkness opposite with his hands behind him.

"Gentleman so kind as to act as my solicitor," says Grandfather 
Smallweed.  "I am not the sort of client for a gentleman of such 
note, but he is so good!"

Mr. Guppy, slightly nudging his friend to take another look, makes 
a shuffling bow to Mr. Tulkinghorn, who returns it with an easy 
nod.  Mr. Tulkinghorn is looking on as if he had nothing else to do 
and were rather amused by the novelty.

"A good deal of property here, sir, I should say," Mr. Guppy 
observes to Mr. Smallweed.

"Principally rags and rubbish, my dear friend!  Rags and rubbish!  
Me and Bart and my granddaughter Judy are endeavouring to make out 
an inventory of what's worth anything to sell.  But we haven't come 
to much as yet; we--haven't--come--to--hah!"

Mr. Smallweed has run down again, while Mr. Weevle's eye, attended 
by Mr. Guppy's eye, has again gone round the room and come back.

"Well, sir," says Mr. Weevle.  "We won't intrude any longer if 
you'll allow us to go upstairs."

"Anywhere, my dear sir, anywhere!  You're at home.  Make yourself 
so, pray!"

As they go upstairs, Mr. Guppy lifts his eyebrows inquiringly and 
looks at Tony.  Tony shakes his head.  They find the old room very 
dull and dismal, with the ashes of the fire that was burning on 
that memorable night yet in the discoloured grate.  They have a 
great disinclination to touch any object, and carefully blow the 
dust from it first.  Nor are they desirous to prolong their visit, 
packing the few movables with all possible speed and never speaking 
above a whisper.

"Look here," says Tony, recoiling.  "Here's that horrible cat 
coming in!"

Mr. Guppy retreats behind a chair.  "Small told me of her.  She 
went leaping and bounding and tearing about that night like a 
dragon, and got out on the house-top, and roamed about up there for 
a fortnight, and then came tumbling down the chimney very thin.  
Did you ever see such a brute?  Looks as if she knew all about it, 
don't she?  Almost looks as if she was Krook.  Shoohoo!  Get out, 
you goblin!"

Lady Jane, in the doorway, with her tiger snarl from ear to ear and 
her club of a tail, shows no intention of obeying; but Mr. 
Tulkinghorn stumbling over her, she spits at his rusty legs, and 
swearing wrathfully, takes her arched back upstairs.  Possibly to 
roam the house-tops again and return by the chimney.

"Mr. Guppy," says Mr. Tulkinghorn, "could I have a word with you?"

Mr. Guppy is engaged in collecting the Galaxy Gallery of British 
Beauty from the wall and depositing those works of art in their old 
ignoble band-box.  "Sir," he returns, reddening, "I wish to act 
with courtesy towards every member of the profession, and 
especially, I am sure, towards a member of it so well known as 
yourself--I will truly add, sir, so distinguished as yourself.  
Still, Mr. Tulkinghorn, sir, I must stipulate that if you have any 
word with me, that word is spoken in the presence of my friend."

"Oh, indeed?" says Mr. Tulkinghorn.

"Yes, sir.  My reasons are not of a personal nature at all, but 
they are amply sufficient for myself."

"No doubt, no doubt."  Mr. Tulkinghorn is as imperturbable as the 
hearthstone to which he has quietly walked.  "The matter is not of 
that consequence that I need put you to the trouble of making any 
conditions, Mr. Guppy."  He pauses here to smile, and his smile is 
as dull and rusty as his pantaloons.  "You are to be congratulated, 
Mr. Guppy; you are a fortunate young man, sir."

"Pretty well so, Mr. Tulkinghorn; I don't complain."

"Complain?  High friends, free admission to great houses, and 
access to elegant ladies!  Why, Mr. Guppy, there are people in 
London who would give their ears to be you."

Mr. Guppy, looking as if he would give his own reddening and still 
reddening ears to be one of those people at present instead of 
himself, replies, "Sir, if I attend to my profession and do what is 
right by Kenge and Carboy, my friends and acquaintances are of no 
consequence to them nor to any member of the profession, not 
excepting Mr. Tulkinghorn of the Fields.  I am not under any 
obligation to explain myself further; and with all respect for you, 
sir, and without offence--I repeat, without offence--"

"Oh, certainly!"

"--I don't intend to do it."

"Quite so," says Mr. Tulkinghorn with a calm nod.  "Very good; I 
see by these portraits that you take a strong interest in the 
fashionable great, sir?"

He addresses this to the astounded Tony, who admits the soft 
impeachment.

"A virtue in which few Englishmen are deficient," observes Mr. 
Tulkinghorn.  He has been standing on the hearthstone with his back 
to the smoked chimney-piece, and now turns round with his glasses 
to his eyes.  "Who is this?  'Lady Dedlock.'  Ha!  A very good 
likeness in its way, but it wants force of character.  Good day to 
you, gentlemen; good day!"

When he has walked out, Mr. Guppy, in a great perspiration, nerves 
himself to the hasty completion of the taking down of the Galaxy 
Gallery, concluding with Lady Dedlock.

"Tony," he says hurriedly to his astonished companion, "let us be 
quick in putting the things together and in getting out of this 
place.  It were in vain longer to conceal from you, Tony, that 
between myself and one of the members of a swan-like aristocracy 
whom I now hold in my hand, there has been undivulged communication 
and association.  The time might have been when I might have 
revealed it to you.  It never will be more.  It is due alike to the 
oath I have taken, alike to the shattered idol, and alike to 
circumstances over which I have no control, that the whole should 
be buried in oblivion.  I charge you as a friend, by the interest 
you have ever testified in the fashionable intelligence, and by any 
little advances with which I may have been able to accommodate you, 
so to bury it without a word of inquiry!"

This charge Mr. Guppy delivers in a state little short of forensic 
lunacy, while his friend shows a dazed mind in his whole head of 
hair and even in his cultivated whiskers.



CHAPTER XL

National and Domestic


England has been in a dreadful state for some weeks.  Lord Coodle 
would go out, Sir Thomas Doodle wouldn't come in, and there being 
nobody in Great Britain (to speak of) except Coodle and Doodle, 
there has been no government.  It is a mercy that the hostile 
meeting between those two great men, which at one time seemed 
inevitable, did not come off, because if both pistols had taken 
effect, and Coodle and Doodle had killed each other, it is to be 
presumed that England must have waited to be governed until young 
Coodle and young Doodle, now in frocks and long stockings, were 
grown up.  This stupendous national calamity, however, was averted 
by Lord Coodle's making the timely discovery that if in the heat of 
debate he had said that he scorned and despised the whole ignoble 
career of Sir Thomas Doodle, he had merely meant to say that party 
differences should never induce him to withhold from it the tribute 
of his warmest admiration; while it as opportunely turned out, on 
the other hand, that Sir Thomas Doodle had in his own bosom 
expressly booked Lord Coodle to go down to posterity as the mirror 
of virtue and honour.  Still England has been some weeks in the 
dismal strait of having no pilot (as was well observed by Sir 
Leicester Dedlock) to weather the storm; and the marvellous part of 
the matter is that England has not appeared to care very much about 
it, but has gone on eating and drinking and marrying and giving in 
marriage as the old world did in the days before the flood.  But 
Coodle knew the danger, and Doodle knew the danger, and all their 
followers and hangers-on had the clearest possible perception of 
the danger.  At last Sir Thomas Doodle has not only condescended to 
come in, but has done it handsomely, bringing in with him all his 
nephews, all his male cousins, and all his brothers-in-law.  So 
there is hope for the old ship yet.

Doodle has found that he must throw himself upon the country, 
chiefly in the form of sovereigns and beer.  In this metamorphosed 
state he is available in a good many places simultaneously and can 
throw himself upon a considerable portion of the country at one 
time.  Britannia being much occupied in pocketing Doodle in the 
form of sovereigns, and swallowing Doodle in the form of beer, and 
in swearing herself black in the face that she does neither--
plainly to the advancement of her glory and morality--the London 
season comes to a sudden end, through all the Doodleites and 
Coodleites dispersing to assist Britannia in those religious 
exercises.

Hence Mrs. Rouncewell, housekeeper at Chesney Wold, foresees, 
though no instructions have yet come down, that the family may 
shortly be expected, together with a pretty large accession of 
cousins and others who can in any way assist the great 
Constitutional work.  And hence the stately old dame, taking Time 
by the forelock, leads him up and down the staircases, and along 
the galleries and passages, and through the rooms, to witness 
before he grows any older that everything is ready, that floors are 
rubbed bright, carpets spread, curtains shaken out, beds puffed and 
patted, still-room and kitchen cleared for action--all things 
prepared as beseems the Dedlock dignity.

This present summer evening, as the sun goes down, the preparations 
are complete.  Dreary and solemn the old house looks, with so many 
appliances of habitation and with no inhabitants except the 
pictured forms upon the walls.  So did these come and go, a Dedlock 
in possession might have ruminated passing along; so did they see 
this gallery hushed and quiet, as I see it now; so think, as I 
think, of the gap that they would make in this domain when they 
were gone; so find it, as I find it, difficult to believe that it 
could be without them; so pass from my world, as I pass from 
theirs, now closing the reverberating door; so leave no blank to 
miss them, and so die.

Through some of the fiery windows beautiful from without, and set, 
at this sunset hour, not in dull-grey stone but in a glorious house 
of gold, the light excluded at other windows pours in rich, lavish, 
overflowing like the summer plenty in the land.  Then do the frozen 
Dedlocks thaw.  Strange movements come upon their features as the 
shadows of leaves play there.  A dense justice in a corner is 
beguiled into a wink.  A staring baronet, with a truncheon, gets a 
dimple in his chin.  Down into the bosom of a stony shepherdess 
there steals a fleck of light and warmth that would have done it 
good a hundred years ago.  One ancestress of Volumnia, in high-
heeled shoes, very like her--casting the shadow of that virgin 
event before her full two centuries--shoots out into a halo and 
becomes a saint.  A maid of honour of the court of Charles the 
Second, with large round eyes (and other charms to correspond), 
seems to bathe in glowing water, and it ripples as it glows.

But the fire of the sun is dying.  Even now the floor is dusky, and 
shadow slowly mounts the walls, bringing the Dedlocks down like age 
and death.  And now, upon my Lady's picture over the great chimney-
piece, a weird shade falls from some old tree, that turns it pale, 
and flutters it, and looks as if a great arm held a veil or hood, 
watching an opportunity to draw it over her.  Higher and darker 
rises shadow on the wall--now a red gloom on the ceiling--now the 
fire is out.

All that prospect, which from the terrace looked so near, has moved 
solemnly away and changed--not the first nor the last of beautiful 
things that look so near and will so change--into a distant 
phantom.  Light mists arise, and the dew falls, and all the sweet 
scents in the garden are heavv in the air.  Now the woods settle 
into great masses as if they were each one profound tree.  And now 
the moon rises to separate them, and to glimmer here and there in 
horizontal lines behind their stems, and to make the avenue a 
pavement of light among high cathedral arches fantastically broken.

Now the moon is high; and the great house, needing habitation more 
than ever, is like a body without life.  Now it is even awful, 
stealing through it, to think of the live people who have slept in 
the solitary bedrooms, to say nothing of the dead.  Now is the time 
for shadow, when every corner is a cavern and every downward step a 
pit, when the stained glass is reflected in pale and faded hues 
upon the floors, when anything and everything can be made of the 
heavy staircase beams excepting their own proper shapes, when the 
armour has dull lights upon it not easily to be distinguished from 
stealthy movement, and when barred helmets are frightfully 
suggestive of heads inside.  But of all the shadows in Chesney 
Wold, the shadow in the long drawing-room upon my Lady's picture is 
the first to come, the last to be disturbed.  At this hour and by 
this light it changes into threatening hands raised up and menacing 
the handsome face with every breath that stirs.

"She is not well, ma'am," says a groom in Mrs. Rouncewell's 
audience-chamber.

"My Lady not well!  What's the matter?"

"Why, my Lady has been but poorly, ma'am, since she was last here--
I don't mean with the family, ma'am, but when she was here as a 
bird of passage like.  My Lady has not been out much for her and 
has kept her room a good deal."

"Chesney Wold, Thomas," rejoins the housekeeper with proud 
complacency, "will set my Lady up!  There is no finer air and no 
healthier soil in the world!"

Thomas may have his own personal opinions on this subject, probably 
hints them in his manner of smoothing his sleek head from the nape 
of his neck to his temples, but he forbears to express them further 
and retires to the servants' hall to regale on cold meat-pie and 
ale.

This groom is the pilot-fish before the nobler shark.  Next 
evening, down come Sir Leicester and my Lady with their largest 
retinue, and down come the cousins and others from all the points 
of the compass.  Thenceforth for some weeks backward and forward 
rush mysterious men with no names, who fly about all those 
particular parts of the country on which Doodle is at present 
throwing himself in an auriferous and malty shower, but who are 
merely persons of a restless disposition and never do anything 
anywhere.

On these national occasions Sir Leicester finds the cousins useful.  
A better man than the Honourable Bob Stables to meet the Hunt at 
dinner, there could not possibly be.  Better got up gentlemen than 
the other cousins to ride over to polling-booths and hustings here 
and there, and show themselves on the side of England, it would be 
hard to find.  Volumnia is a little dim, but she is of the true 
descent; and there are many who appreciate her sprightly 
conversation, her French conundrums so old as to have become in the 
cycles of time almost new again, the honour of taking the fair 
Dedlock in to dinner, or even the privilege of her hand in the 
dance.  On these national occasions dancing may be a patriotic 
service, and Volumnia is constantly seen hopping about for the good 
of an ungrateful and unpensioning country.

My Lady takes no great pains to entertain the numerous guests, and 
being still unwell, rarely appears until late in the day.  But at 
all the dismal dinners, leaden lunches, basilisk balls, and other 
melancholy pageants, her mere appearance is a relief.  As to Sir 
Leicester, he conceives it utterly impossible that anything can be 
wanting, in any direction, by any one who has the good fortune to 
be received under that roof; and in a state of sublime 
satisfaction, he moves among the company, a magnificent 
refrigerator.

Daily the cousins trot through dust and canter over roadside turf, 
away to hustings and polling-booths (with leather gloves and 
hunting-whips for the counties and kid gloves and riding-canes for 
the boroughs), and daily bring back reports on which Sir Leicester 
holds forth after dinner.  Daily the restless men who have no 
occupation in life present the appearance of being rather busy.  
Daily Volumnia has a little cousinly talk with Sir Leicester on the 
state of the nation, from which Sir Leicester is disposed to 
conclude that Volumnia is a more reflecting woman than he had 
thought her.

"How are we getting on?" says Miss Volumnia, clasping her hands.  
"ARE we safe?"

The mighty business is nearly over by this time, and Doodle will 
throw himself off the country in a few days more.  Sir Leicester 
has just appeared in the long drawing-room after dinner, a bright 
particular star surrounded by clouds of cousins.

"Volumnia," replies Sir Leicester, who has a list in his hand, "we 
are doing tolerably."

"Only tolerably!"

Although it is summer weather, Sir Leicester always has his own 
particular fire in the evening.  He takes his usual screened seat 
near it and repeats with much firmness and a little displeasure, as 
who should say, I am not a common man, and when I say tolerably, it 
must not be understood as a common expression, "Volumnia, we are 
doing tolerably."

"At least there is no opposition to YOU," Volumnia asserts with 
confidence.

"No, Volumnia.  This distracted country has lost its senses in many 
respects, I grieve to say, but--"

"It is not so mad as that.  I am glad to hear it!"

Volumnia's finishing the sentence restores her to favour.  Sir 
Leicester, with a gracious inclination of his head, seems to say to 
himself, "A sensible woman this, on the whole, though occasionally 
precipitate."

In fact, as to this question of opposition, the fair Dedlock's 
observation was superfluous, Sir Leicester on these occasions 
always delivering in his own candidateship, as a kind of handsome 
wholesale order to be promptly executed.  Two other little seats 
that belong to him he treats as retail orders of less importance, 
merely sending down the men and signifying to the tradespeople, 
"You will have the goodness to make these materials into two 
members of Parliament and to send them home when done."

"I regret to say, Volumnia, that in many places the people have 
shown a bad spirit, and that this opposition to the government has 
been of a most determined and most implacable description."

"W-r-retches!" says Volumnia.

"Even," proceeds Sir Leicester, glancing at the circumjacent 
cousins on sofas and ottomans, "even in many--in fact, in most--of 
those places in which the government has carried it against a 
faction--"

(Note, by the way, that the Coodleites are always a faction with 
the Doodleites, and that the Doodleites occupy exactly the same 
position towards the Coodleites.)

"--Even in them I am shocked, for the credit of Englishmen, to be 
constrained to inform you that the party has not triumphed without 
being put to an enormous expense.  Hundreds," says Sir Leicester, 
eyeing the cousins with increasing dignity and swelling 
indignation, "hundreds of thousands of pounds!"

If Volumnia have a fault, it is the fault of being a trifle too 
innocent, seeing that the innocence which would go extremely well 
with a sash and tucker is a little out of keeping with the rouge 
and pearl necklace.  Howbeit, impelled by innocence, she asks, 
"What for?"

"Volumnia," remonstrates Sir Leicester with his utmost severity.  
"Volumnia!"

"No, no, I don't mean what for," cries Volumnia with her favourite 
little scream.  "How stupid I am!  I mean what a pity!"

"I am glad," returns Sir Leicester, "that you do mean what a pity."

Volumnia hastens to express her opinion that the shocking people 
ought to be tried as traitors and made to support the party.

"I am glad, Volumnia," repeats Sir Leicester, unmindful of these 
mollifying sentiments, "that you do mean what a pity.  It is 
disgraceful to the electors.  But as you, though inadvertently and 
without intending so unreasonable a question, asked me 'what for?' 
let me reply to you.  For necessary expenses.  And I trust to your 
good sense, Volumnia, not to pursue the subject, here or 
elsewhere."

Sir Leicester feels it incumbent on him to observe a crushing 
aspect towards Volumnia because it is whispered abroad that these 
necessary expenses will, in some two hundred election petitions, be 
unpleasantly connected with the word bribery, and because some 
graceless jokers have consequently suggested the omission from the 
Church service of the ordinary supplication in behalf of the High 
Court of Parliament and have recommended instead that the prayers 
of the congregation be requested for six hundred and fifty-eight 
gentlemen in a very unhealthy state.

"I suppose," observes Volumnia, having taken a little time to 
recover her spirits after her late castigation, "I suppose Mr. 
Tulkinghorn has been worked to death."

"I don't know," says Sir Leicester, opening his eyes, "why Mr. 
Tulkinghorn should be worked to death.  I don't know what Mr. 
Tulkinghorn's engagements may be.  He is not a candidate."

Volumnia had thought he might have been employed.  Sir Leicester 
could desire to know by whom, and what for.  Volumnia, abashed 
again, suggests, by somebody--to advise and make arrangements.  Sir 
Leicester is not aware that any client of Mr. Tulkinghorn has been 
in need of his assistance.

Lady Dedlock, seated at an open window with her arm upon its 
cushioned ledge and looking out at the evening shadows falling on 
the park, has seemed to attend since the lawyer's name was 
mentioned.

A languid cousin with a moustache in a state of extreme debility 
now observes from his couch that man told him ya'as'dy that 
Tulkinghorn had gone down t' that iron place t' give legal 'pinion 
'bout something, and that contest being over t' day, 'twould be 
highly jawlly thing if Tulkinghorn should 'pear with news that 
Coodle man was floored.

Mercury in attendance with coffee informs Sir Leicester, hereupon, 
that Mr. Tulkinghorn has arrived and is taking dinner.  My Lady 
turns her head inward for the moment, then looks out again as 
before.

Volumnia is charmed to hear that her delight is come.  He is so 
original, such a stolid creature, such an immense being for knowing 
all sorts of things and never telling them!  Volumnia is persuaded 
that he must be a Freemason.  Is sure he is at the head of a lodge, 
and wears short aprons, and is made a perfect idol of with 
candlesticks and trowels.  These lively remarks the fair Dedlock 
delivers in her youthful manner, while making a purse.

"He has not been here once," she adds, "since I came.  I really had 
some thoughts of breaking my heart for the inconstant creature.  I 
had almost made up my mind that he was dead."

It may be the gathering gloom of evening, or it may be the darker 
gloom within herself, but a shade is on my Lady's face, as if she 
thought, "I would he were!"

"Mr. Tulkinghorn," says Sir Leicester, "is always welcome here and 
always discreet wheresoever he is.  A very valuable person, and 
deservedly respected."

The debilitated cousin supposes he is "'normously rich fler."

"He has a stake in the country," says Sir Leicester, "I have no 
doubt.  He is, of course, handsomely paid, and he associates almost 
on a footing of equality with the highest society."

Everybody starts.  For a gun is fired close by.

"Good gracious, what's that?" cries Volumnia with her little 
withered scream.

"A rat," says my Lady.  "And they have shot him."

Enter Mr. Tulkinghorn, followed by Mercuries with lamps and 
candles.

"No, no," says Sir Leicester, "I think not.  My Lady, do you object 
to the twilight?"

On the contrary, my Lady prefers it.

"Volumnia?"

Oh!  Nothing is so delicious to Volumnia as to sit and talk in the 
dark.

"Then take them away," says Sir Leicester.  "Tulkinghorn, I beg 
your pardon.  How do you do?"

Mr. Tulkinghorn with his usual leisurely ease advances, renders his 
passing homage to my Lady, shakes Sir Leicester's hand, and 
subsides into the chair proper to him when he has anything to 
communicate, on the opposite side of the Baronet's little 
newspaper-table.  Sir Leicester is apprehensive that my Lady, not 
being very well, will take cold at that open window.  My Lady is 
obliged to him, but would rather sit there for the air.  Sir 
Leicester rises, adjusts her scarf about her, and returns to his 
seat.  Mr. Tulkinghorn in the meanwhile takes a pinch of snuff.

"Now," says Sir Leicester.  "How has that contest gone?"

"Oh, hollow from the beginning.  Not a chance.  They have brought 
in both their people.  You are beaten out of all reason.  Three to 
one."

It is a part of Mr. Tulkinghorn's policy and mastery to have no 
political opinions; indeed, NO opinions.  Therefore he says "you" 
are beaten, and not "we."

Sir Leicester is majestically wroth.  Volumnia never heard of such 
a thing.  'The debilitated cousin holds that it's sort of thing 
that's sure tapn slongs votes--giv'n--Mob.

"It's the place, you know," Mr. Tulkinghorn goes on to say in the 
fast-increasing darkness when there is silence again, "where they 
wanted to put up Mrs. Rouncewell's son."

"A proposal which, as you correctly informed me at the time, he had 
the becoming taste and perception," observes Sir Leicester, "to 
decline.  I cannot say that I by any means approve of the 
sentiments expressed by Mr. Rouncewell when he was here for some 
half-hour in this room, but there was a sense of propriety in his 
decision which I am glad to acknowledge."

"Ha!" says Mr. Tulkinghorn.  "It did not prevent him from being 
very active in this election, though."

Sir Leicester is distinctly heard to gasp before speaking.  "Did I 
understand you?  Did you say that Mr. Rouncewell had been very 
active in this election?"

"Uncommonly active."

"Against--"

"Oh, dear yes, against you.  He is a very good speaker.  Plain and 
emphatic.  He made a damaging effect, and has great influence.  In 
the business part of the proceedings he carried all before him."

It is evident to the whole company, though nobody can see him, that 
Sir Leicester is staring majestically.

"And he was much assisted," says Mr. Tulkinghorn as a wind-up, "by 
his son."

"By his son, sir?" repeats Sir Leicester with awful politeness.

"By his son."

"The son who wished to marry the young woman in my Lady's service?"

"That son.  He has but one."

"Then upon my honour," says Sir Leicester after a terrific pause 
during which he has been heard to snort and felt to stare, "then 
upon my honour, upon my life, upon my reputation and principles, 
the floodgates of society are burst open, and the waters have--a--
obliterated the landmarks of the framework of the cohesion by which 
things are held together!"

General burst of cousinly indignation.  Volumnia thinks it is 
really high time, you know, for somebody in power to step in and do 
something strong.  Debilitated cousin thinks--country's going--
Dayvle--steeple-chase pace.

"I beg," says Sir Leicester in a breathless condition, "that we may 
not comment further on this circumstance.  Comment is superfluous.  
My Lady, let me suggest in reference to that young woman--"

"I have no intention," observes my Lady from her window in a low 
but decided tone, "of parting with her."

"That was not my meaning," returns Sir Leicester.  "I am glad to 
hear you say so.  I would suggest that as you think her worthy of 
your patronage, you should exert your influence to keep her from 
these dangerous hands.  You might show her what violence would be 
done in such association to her duties and principles, and you 
might preserve her for a better fate.  You might point out to her 
that she probably would, in good time, find a husband at Chesney 
Wold by whom she would not be--"  Sir Leicester adds, after a 
moment's consideration, "dragged from the altars of her 
forefathers."

These remarks he offers with his unvarying politeness and deference 
when he addresses himself to his wife.  She merely moves her head 
in reply.  The moon is rising, and where she sits there is a little 
stream of cold pale light, in which her head is seen.

"It is worthy of remark," says Mr. Tulkinghorn, "however, that 
these people are, in their way, very proud."

"Proud?"  Sir Leicester doubts his hearing.

"I should not be surprised if they all voluntarily abandoned the 
girl--yes, lover and all--instead of her abandoning them, supposing 
she remained at Chesney Wold under such circumstances."

"Well!" says Sir Leicester tremulously.  "Well! You should know, 
Mr. Tulkinghorn.  You have been among them."

"Really, Sir Leicester," returns the lawyer, "I state the fact.  
Why, I could tell you a story--with Lady Dedlock's permission."

Her head concedes it, and Volumnia is enchanted.  A story!  Oh, he 
is going to tell something at last!  A ghost in it, Volumnia hopes?

"No.  Real flesh and blood."  Mr. Tulkinghorn stops for an instant 
and repeats with some little emphasis grafted upon his usual 
monotony, "Real flesh and blood, Miss Dedlock.  Sir Leicester, 
these particulars have only lately become known to me.  They are 
very brief.  They exemplify what I have said.  I suppress names for 
the present.  Lady Dedlock will not think me ill-bred, I hope?"

By the light of the fire, which is low, he can be seen looking 
towards the moonlight.  By the light of the moon Lady Dedlock can 
be seen, perfecfly still.

"A townsman of this Mrs. Rouncewell, a man in exactly parallel 
circumstances as I am told, had the good fortune to have a daughter 
who attracted the notice of a great lady.  I speak of really a 
great lady, not merely great to him, but married to a gentleman of 
your condition, Sir Leicester."

Sir Leicester condescendingly says, "Yes, Mr. Tulkinghorn," 
implying that then she must have appeared of very considerable 
moral dimensions indeed in the eyes of an iron-master.

"The lady was wealthy and beautiful, and had a liking for the girl, 
and treated her with great kindness, and kept her always near her.  
Now this lady preserved a secret under all her greatness, which she 
had preserved for many years.  In fact, she had in early life been 
engaged to marry a young rake--he was a captain in the army--
nothing connected with whom came to any good.  She never did marry 
him, but she gave birth to a child of which he was the father."

By the light of the fire he can be seen looking towards the 
moonlight.  By the moonlight, Lady Dedlock can be seen in profile, 
perfectly still.

"The captain in the army being dead, she believed herself safe; but 
a train of circumstances with which I need not trouble you led to 
discovery.  As I received the story, they began in an imprudence on 
her own part one day when she was taken by surprise, which shows 
how difficult it is for the firmest of us (she was very firm) to be 
always guarded.  There was great domestic trouble and amazement, 
you may suppose; I leave you to imagine, Sir Leicester, the 
husband's grief.  But that is not the present point.  When Mr. 
Rouncewell's townsman heard of the disclosure, he no more allowed 
the girl to be patronized and honoured than he would have suffered 
her to be trodden underfoot before his eyes.  Such was his pride, 
that he indignantly took her away, as if from reproach and 
disgrace.  He had no sense of the honour done him and his daughter 
by the lady's condescension; not the least.  He resented the girl's 
position, as if the lady had been the commonest of commoners.  That 
is the story.  I hope Lady Dedlock will excuse its painful nature."

There are various opinions on the merits, more or less conflicting 
with Volumnia's.  That fair young creature cannot believe there 
ever was any such lady and rejects the whole history on the 
threshold.  The majority incline to the debilitated cousin's 
sentiment, which is in few words--"no business--Rouncewell's fernal 
townsman."  Sir Leicester generally refers back in his mind to Wat 
Tyler and arranges a sequence of events on a plan of his own.

There is not much conversation in all, for late hours have been 
kept at Chesney Wold since the necessary expenses elsewhere began, 
and this is the first night in many on which the family have been 
alone.  It is past ten when Sir Leicester begs Mr. Tulkinghorn to 
ring for candles.  Then the stream of moonlight has swelled into a 
lake, and then Lady Dedlock for the first time moves, and rises, 
and comes forward to a table for a glass of water.  Winking 
cousins, bat-like in the candle glare, crowd round to give it; 
Volumnia (always ready for something better if procurable) takes 
another, a very mild sip of which contents her; Lady Dedlock, 
graceful, self-possessed, looked after by admiring eyes, passes 
away slowly down the long perspective by the side of that nymph, 
not at all improving her as a question of contrast.



CHAPTER XLI

In Mr. Tulkinghorn's Room


Mr. Tulkinghorn arrives in his turret-room a little breathed by the 
journey up, though leisurely performed.  There is an expression on 
his face as if he had discharged his mind of some grave matter and 
were, in his close way, satisfied.  To say of a man so severely and 
strictly self-repressed that he is triumphant would be to do him as 
great an injustice as to suppose him troubled with love or 
sentiment or any romantic weakness.  He is sedately satisfied.  
Perhaps there is a rather increased sense of power upon him as he 
loosely grasps one of his veinous wrists with his other hand and 
holding it behind his back walks noiselessly up and down.

There is a capacious writing-table in the room on which is a pretty 
large accumulation of papers.  The green lamp is lighted, his 
reading-glasses lie upon the desk, the easy-chair is wheeled up to 
it, and it would seem as though he had intended to bestow an hour 
or so upon these claims on his attention before going to bed.  But 
he happens not to be in a business mind.  After a glance at the 
documents awaiting his notice--with his head bent low over the 
table, the old man's sight for print or writing being defective at 
night--he opens the French window and steps out upon the leads.  
There he again walks slowly up and down in the same attitude, 
subsiding, if a man so cool may have any need to subside, from the 
story he has related downstairs.

The time was once when men as knowing as Mr. Tulkinghorn would walk 
on turret-tops in the starlight and look up into the sky to read 
their fortunes there.  Hosts of stars are visible to-night, though 
their brilliancy is eclipsed by the splendour of the moon.  If he 
be seeking his own star as he methodically turns and turns upon the 
leads, it should be but a pale one to be so rustily represented 
below.  If he be tracing out his destiny, that may be written in 
other characters nearer to his hand.

As he paces the leads with his eyes most probably as high above his 
thoughts as they are high above the earth, he is suddenly stopped 
in passing the window by two eyes that meet his own.  The ceiling 
of his room is rather low; and the upper part of the door, which is 
opposite the window, is of glass.  There is an inner baize door, 
too, but the night being warm he did not close it when he came 
upstairs.  These eyes that meet his own are looking in through the 
glass from the corridor outside.  He knows them well.  The blood 
has not flushed into his face so suddenly and redly for many a long 
year as when he recognizes Lady Dedlock.

He steps into the room, and she comes in too, closing both the 
doors behind her.  There is a wild disturbance--is it fear or 
anger?--in her eyes.  In her carriage and all else she looks as she 
looked downstairs two hours ago.

Is it fear or is it anger now?  He cannot be sure.  Both might be 
as pale, both as intent.

"Lady Dedlock?"

She does not speak at first, nor even when she has slowly dropped 
into the easy-chair by the table.  They look at each other, like 
two pictures.

"Why have you told my story to so many persons?"

"Lady Dedlock, it was necessary for me to inform you that I knew 
it."

"How long have you known it?"

"I have suspected it a long while--fully known it a little while."

"Months?"

"Days."

He stands before her with one hand on a chair-back and the other in 
his old-fashioned waistcoat and shirt-frill, exactly as he has 
stood before her at any time since her marriage.  The same formal 
politeness, the same composed deference that might as well be 
defiance; the whole man the same dark, cold object, at the same 
distance, which nothing has ever diminished.

"Is this true concerning the poor girl?"

He slightly inclines and advances his head as not quite 
understanding the question.

"You know what you related.  Is it true?  Do her friends know my 
story also?  Is it the town-talk yet?  Is it chalked upon the walls 
and cried in the streets?"

So!  Anger, and fear, and shame.  All three contending.  What power 
this woman has to keep these raging passions down!  Mr. 
Tulkinghorn's thoughts take such form as he looks at her, with his 
ragged grey eyebrows a hair's breadth more contracted than usual 
under her gaze.

"No, Lady Dedlock.  That was a hypothetical case, arising out of 
Sir Leicester's unconsciously carrying the matter with so high a 
hand.  But it would be a real case if they knew--what we know."

"Then they do not know it yet?"

"No."

"Can I save the poor girl from injury before they know it?"

"Really, Lady Dedlock," Mr. Tulkinghorn replies, "I cannot give a 
satisfactory opinion on that point."

And he thinks, with the interest of attentive curiosity, as he 
watches the struggle in her breast, "The power and force of this 
woman are astonishing!"

"Sir," she says, for the moment obliged to set her lips with all 
the energy she has, that she may speak distinctly, "I will make it 
plainer.  I do not dispute your hypothetical case.  I anticipated 
it, and felt its truth as strongly as you can do, when I saw Mr. 
Rouncewell here.  I knew very well that if he could have had the 
power of seeing me as I was, he would consider the poor girl 
tarnished by having for a moment been, although most innocently, 
the subject of my great and distinguished patronage.  But I have an 
interest in her, or I should rather say--no longer belonging to 
this place--I had, and if you can find so much consideration for 
the woman under your foot as to remember that, she will be very 
sensible of your mercy."

Mr. Tulkinghorn, profoundly attentive, throws this off with a shrug 
of self-depreciation and contracts his eyebrows a little more.

"You have prepared me for my exposure, and I thank you for that 
too.  Is there anything that you require of me?  Is there any claim 
that I can release or any charge or trouble that I can spare my 
husband in obtaining HIS release by certifying to the exactness of 
your discovery?  I will write anything, here and now, that you will 
dictate.  I am ready to do it."

And she would do it, thinks the lawver, watchful of the firm hand 
with which she takes the pen!

"I will not trouble you, Lady Dedlock.  Pray spare yourself."

"I have long expected this, as you know.  I neither wish to spare 
myself nor to be spared.  You can do nothing worse to me than you 
have done.  Do what remains now."

"Lady Dedlock, there is nothing to be done.  I will take leave to 
say a few words when you have finished."

Their need for watching one another should be over now, but they do 
it all this time, and the stars watch them both through the opened 
window.  Away in the moonlight lie the woodland fields at rest, and 
the wide house is as quiet as the narrow one.  The narrow one!  
Where are the digger and the spade, this peaceful night, destined 
to add the last great secret to the many secrets of the Tulkinghorn 
existence?  Is the man born yet, is the spade wrought yet?  Curious 
questions to consider, more curious perhaps not to consider, under 
the watching stars upon a summer night.

"Of repentance or remorse or any feeling of mine," Lady Dedlock 
presently proceeds, "I say not a word.  If I were not dumb, you 
would be deaf.  Let that go by.  It is not for your ears."

He makes a feint of offering a protest, but she sweeps it away with 
her disdainful hand.

"Of other and very different things I come to speak to you.  My 
jewels are all in their proper places of keeping.  They will be 
found there.  So, my dresses.  So, all the valuables I have.  Some 
ready money I had with me, please to say, but no large amount.  I 
did not wear my own dress, in order that I might avoid observation.  
I went to be henceforward lost.  Make this known.  I leave no other 
charge with you."

"Excuse me, Lady Dedlock," says Mr. Tulkinghorn, quite unmoved.  "I 
am not sure that I understand you.  You want--"

"To be lost to all here.  I leave Chesney Wold to-night.  I go this 
hour."

Mr. Tulkinghorn shakes his head.  She rises, but he, without moving 
hand from chair-back or from old-fashioned waistcoat and shirt-
frill, shakes his head.

"What?  Not go as I have said?"

"No, Lady Dedlock," he very calmly replies.

"Do you know the relief that my disappearance will be?  Have you 
forgotten the stain and blot upon this place, and where it is, and 
who it is?"

"No, Lady Dedlock, not by any means."

Without deigning to rejoin, she moves to the inner door and has it 
in her hand when he says to her, without himself stirring hand or 
foot or raising his voice, "Lady Dedlock, have the goodness to stop 
and hear me, or before you reach the staircase I shall ring the 
alarm-bell and rouse the house.  And then I must speak out before 
every guest and servant, every man and woman, in it."

He has conquered her.  She falters, trembles, and puts her hand 
confusedly to her head.  Slight tokens these in any one else, but 
when so practised an eye as Mr. Tulkinghorn's sees indecision for a 
moment in such a subject, he thoroughly knows its value.

He promptly says again, "Have the goodness to hear me, Lady 
Dedlock," and motions to the chair from which she has risen.  She 
hesitates, but he motions again, and she sits down.

"The relations between us are of an unfortunate description, Lady 
Dedlock; but as they are not of my making, I will not apologize for 
them.  The position I hold in reference to Sir Leicester is so well 
known to you that I can hardly imagine but that I must long have 
appeared in your eyes the natural person to make this discovery."

"Sir," she returns without looking up from the ground on which her 
eyes are now fixed, "I had better have gone.  It would have been 
far better not to have detained me.  I have no more to say."

"Excuse me, Lady Dedlock, if I add a little more to hear."

"I wish to hear it at the window, then.  I can't breathe where I 
am."

His jealous glance as she walks that way betrays an instant's 
misgiving that she may have it in her thoughts to leap over, and 
dashing against ledge and cornice, strike her life out upon the 
terrace below.  But a moment's observation of her figure as she 
stands in the window without any support, looking out at the stars
--not up-gloomily out at those stars which are low in the heavens, 
reassures him.  By facing round as she has moved, he stands a 
little behind her.

"Lady Dedlock, I have not yet been able to come to a decision 
satisfactory to myself on the course before me.  I am not clear 
what to do or how to act next.  I must request you, in the 
meantime, to keep your secret as you have kept it so long and not 
to wonder that I keep it too."

He pauses, but she makes no reply.

"Pardon me, Lady Dedlock.  This is an important subject.  You are 
honouring me with your attention?"

"I am."

"'Thank you.  I might have known it from what I have seen of your 
strength of character.  I ought not to have asked the question, but 
I have the habit of making sure of my ground, step by step, as I go 
on.  The sole consideration in this unhappy case is Sir Leicester."

"'Then why," she asks in a low voice and without removing her 
gloomy look from those distant stars, "do you detain me in his 
house?"

"Because he IS the consideration.  Lady Dedlock, I have no occasion 
to tell you that Sir Leicester is a very proud man, that his 
reliance upon you is implicit, that the fall of that moon out of 
the sky would not amaze him more than your fall from your high 
position as his wife."

She breathes quickly and heavily, but she stands as unflinchingly 
as ever he has seen her in the midst of her grandest company.

"I declare to you, Lady Dedlock, that with anything short of this 
case that I have, I would as soon have hoped to root up by means of 
my own strength and my own hands the oldest tree on this estate as 
to shake your hold upon Sir Leicester and Sir Leicester's trust and 
confidence in you.  And even now, with this case, I hesitate.  Not 
that he could doubt (that, even with him, is impossible), but that 
nothing can prepare him for the blow."

"Not my flight?" she returned.  "Think of it again."

"Your flight, Lady Dedlock, would spread the whole truth, and a 
hundred times the whole truth, far and wide.  It would be 
impossible to save the family credit for a day.  It is not to be 
thought of."

There is a quiet decision in his reply which admits of no 
remonstrance.

"When I speak of Sir Leicester being the sole consideration, he and 
the family credit are one.  Sir Leicester and the baronetcy, Sir 
Leicester and Chesney Wold, Sir Leicester and his ancestors and his 
patrimony"--Mr. Tulkinghorn very dry here--"are, I need not say to 
you, Lady Dedlock, inseparable."

"Go on!"

"Therefore," says Mr. Tulkinghorn, pursuing his case in his jog-
trot style, "I have much to consider.  This is to be hushed up if 
it can be.  How can it be, if Sir Leicester is driven out of his 
wits or laid upon a death-bed?  If I inflicted this shock upon him 
to-morrow morning, how could the immediate change in him be 
accounted for?  What could have caused it?  What could have divided 
you?  Lady Dedlock, the wall-chalking and the street-crying would 
come on directly, and you are to remember that it would not affect 
you merely (whom I cannot at all consider in this business) but 
your husband, Lady Dedlock, your husband."

He gets plainer as he gets on, but not an atom more emphatic or 
animated.

"There is another point of view," he continues, "in which the case 
presents itself.  Sir Leicester is devoted to you almost to 
infatuation.  He might not be able to overcome that infatuation, 
even knowing what we know.  I am putting an extreme case, but it 
might be so.  If so, it were better that he knew nothing.  Better 
for common sense, better for him, better for me.  I must take all 
this into account, and it combines to render a decision very 
difficult."

She stands looking out at the same stars without a word.  They are 
beginning to pale, and she looks as if their coldness froze her.

"My experience teaches me," says Mr. Tulkinghorn, who has by this 
time got his hands in his pockets and is going on in his business 
consideration of the matter like a machine.  "My experience teaches 
me, Lady Dedlock, that most of the people I know would do far 
better to leave marriage alone.  It is at the bottom of three 
fourths of their troubles.  So I thought when Sir Leicester 
married, and so I always have thought since.  No more about that.  
I must now be guided by circumstances.  In the meanwhile I must beg 
you to keep your own counsel, and I will keep mine."

"I am to drag my present life on, holding its pains at your 
pleasure, day by day?" she asks, still looking at the distant sky.

"Yes, I am afraid so, Lady Dedlock."

"It is necessary, you think, that I should be so tied to the 
stake?"

"I am sure that what I recommend is necessary."

"I am to remain on this gaudy platforna on which my miserable 
deception has been so long acted, and it is to fall beneath me when 
you give the signal?" she said slowly.

"Not without notice, Lady Dedlock.  I shall take no step without 
forewarning you."

She asks all her questions as if she were repeating them from 
memory or calling them over in her sleep.

"We are to meet as usual?"

"Precisely as usual, if you please."

"And I am to hide my guilt, as I have done so many years?"

"As you have done so many years.  I should not have made that 
reference myself, Lady Dedlock, but I may now remind you that your 
secret can be no heavier to you than it was, and is no worse and no 
better than it was.  I know it certainly, but I believe we have 
never wholly trusted each other."

She stands absorbed in the same frozen way for some little time 
before asking, "Is there anything more to be sald to-night?"

"Why," Mr. Tulkinghorn returns methodically as he softly rubs his 
hands, "I should like to be assured of your acquiescence in my 
arrangements, Lady Dedlock."

"You may be assured of it."

"Good.  And I would wish in conclusion to remind you, as a business 
precaution, in case it should be necessary to recall the fact in 
any communication with Sir Leicester, that throughout our interview 
I have expressly stated my sole consideration to be Sir Leicester's 
feelings and honour and the family reputation.  I should have been 
happy to have made Lady Dedlock a prominent consideration, too, if 
the case had admitted of it; but unfortunately it does not."

"I can attest your fidelity, sir."

Both before and after saving it she remains absorbed, but at length 
moves, and turns, unshaken in her natural and acquired presence, 
towards the door.  Mr. Tulkinghorn opens both the doors exactly as 
he would have done yesterday, or as he would have done ten years 
ago, and makes his old-fashioned bow as she passes out.  It is not 
an ordinary look that he receives from the handsome face as it goes 
into the darkness, and it is not an ordinary movement, though a 
very slight one, that acknowledges his courtesy.  But as he 
reflects when he is left alone, the woman has been putting no 
common constraint upon herself.

He would know it all the better if he saw the woman pacing her own 
rooms with her hair wildly thrown from her flung-back face, her 
hands clasped behind her head, her figure twisted as if by pain.  
He would think so all the more if he saw the woman thus hurrying up 
and down for hours, without fatigue, without intermission, followed 
by the faithful step upon the Ghost's Walk.  But he shuts out the 
now chilled air, draws the window-curtain, goes to bed, and falls 
asleep.  And truly when the stars go out and the wan day peeps into 
the turret-chamber, finding him at his oldest, he looks as if the 
digger and the spade were both commissioned and would soon be 
digging.

The same wan day peeps in at Sir Leicester pardoning the repentant 
country in a majestically condescending dream; and at the cousins 
entering on various public employments, principally receipt of 
salary; and at the chaste Volumnia, bestowing a dower of fifty 
thousand pounds upon a hideous old general with a mouth of false 
teeth like a pianoforte too full of keys, long the admiration of 
Bath and the terror of every other commuuity.  Also into rooms high 
in the roof, and into offices in court-yards, and over stables, 
where humbler ambition dreams of bliss, in keepers' lodges, and in 
holy matrimony with Will or Sally.  Up comes the bright sun, 
drawing everything up with it--the Wills and Sallys, the latent 
vapour in the earth, the drooping leaves and flowers, the birds and 
beasts and creeping things, the gardeners to sweep the dewy turf 
and unfold emerald velvet where the roller passes, the smoke of the 
great kitchen fire wreathing itself straight and high into the 
lightsome air.  Lastly, up comes the flag over Mr. Tulkinghorn's 
unconscious head cheerfully proclaiming that Sir Leicester and Lady 
Dedlock are in their happy home and that there is hospitality at 
the place in Lincolnshire.



CHAPTER XLII

In Mr. Tulkinghorn's Chambers


From the verdant undulations and the spreading oaks of the Dedlock 
property, Mr. Tulkinghorn transfers himself to the stale heat and 
dust of London.  His manner of coming and going between the two 
places is one of his impenetrabilities.  He walks into Chesney Wold 
as if it were next door to his chambers and returns to his chambers 
as if he had never been out of Lincoln's Inn Fields.  He neither 
changes his dress before the journey nor talks of it afterwards.  
He melted out of his turret-room this morning, just as now, in the 
late twilight, he melts into his own square.

Like a dingy London bird among the birds at roost in these pleasant 
fields, where the sheep are all made into parchment, the goats into 
wigs, and the pasture into chaff, the lawyer, smoke-dried and 
faded, dwelling among mankind but not consorting with them, aged 
without experience of genial youth, and so long used to make his 
cramped nest in holes and corners of human nature that he has 
forgotten its broader and better range, comes sauntering home.  In 
the oven made by the hot pavements and hot buildings, he has baked 
himself dryer than usual; and he has in his thirsty mind his 
mellowed port-wine half a century old.

The lamplighter is skipping up and down his ladder on Mr. 
Tulkinghorn's side of the Fields when that high-priest of noble 
mysteries arrives at his own dull court-yard.  He ascends the door-
steps and is gliding into the dusky hall when he encounters, on the 
top step, a bowing and propitiatory little man.

"Is that Snagsby?"

"Yes, sir.  I hope you are well, sir.  I was just giving you up, 
sir, and going home."

"Aye?  What is it?  What do you want with me?"

"Well, sir," says Mr. Snagsby, holding his hat at the side of his 
head in his deference towards his best customer, "I was wishful to 
say a word to you, sir."

"Can you say it here?"

"Perfectly, sir."

"Say it then."  The lawyer turns, leans his arms on the iron 
railing at the top of the steps, and looks at the lamplighter 
lighting the court-yard.

"It is relating," says Mr. Snagsby in a mysterious low voice, "it 
is relating--not to put too fine a point upon it--to the foreigner, 
sir!"

Mr. Tulkinghorn eyes him with some surprise.  "What foreigner?"

"The foreign female, sir.  French, if I don't mistake?  I am not 
acquainted with that language myself, but I should judge from her 
manners and appearance that she was French; anyways, certainly 
foreign.  Her that was upstairs, sir, when Mr. Bucket and me had 
the honour of waiting upon you with the sweeping-boy that night."

"Oh! Yes, yes.  Mademoiselle Hortense."

"Indeed, sir?" Mr. Snagsby coughs his cough of submission behind 
his hat.  "I am not acquainted myself with the names of foreigners 
in general, but I have no doubt it WOULD be that."  Mr. Snagsby 
appears to have set out in this reply with some desperate design of 
repeating the name, but on reflection coughs again to excuse 
himself.

"And what can you have to say, Snagsby," demands Mr. Tulkinghorn, 
"about her?"

"Well, sir," returns the stationer, shading his communication with 
his hat, "it falls a little hard upon me.  My domestic happiness is 
very great--at least, it's as great as can be expected, I'm sure--
but my little woman is rather given to jealousy.  Not to put too 
fine a point upon it, she is very much given to jealousy.  And you 
see, a foreign female of that genteel appearance coming into the 
shop, and hovering--I should be the last to make use of a strong 
expression if I could avoid it, but hovering, sir--in the court--
you know it is--now ain't it?  I only put it to yourself, sir.

Mr. Snagsby, having said this in a very plaintive manner, throws in 
a cough of general application to fill up all the blanks.

"Why, what do you mean?" asks Mr. Tulkinghorn.

"Just so, sir," returns Mr. Snagsby; "I was sure you would feel it 
yourself and would excuse the reasonableness of MY feelings when 
coupled with the known excitableness of my little woman.  You see, 
the foreign female--which you mentioned her name just now, with 
quite a native sound I am sure--caught up the word Snagsby that 
night, being uncommon quick, and made inquiry, and got the 
direction and come at dinner-time.  Now Guster, our young woman, is 
timid and has fits, and she, taking fright at the foreigner's 
looks--which are fierce--and at a grinding manner that she has of 
speaking--which is calculated to alarm a weak mind--gave way to it, 
instead of bearing up against it, and tumbled down the kitchen 
stairs out of one into another, such fits as I do sometimes think 
are never gone into, or come out of, in any house but ours.  
Consequently there was by good fortune ample occupation for my 
little woman, and only me to answer the shop.  When she DID say 
that Mr. Tulkinghorn, being always denied to her by his employer 
(which I had no doubt at the time was a foreign mode of viewing a 
clerk), she would do herself the pleasure of continually calling at 
my place until she was let in here.  Since then she has been, as I 
began by saying, hovering, hovering, sir"--Mr. Snagsby repeats the 
word with pathetic emphasis--"in the court.  The effects of which 
movement it is impossible to calculate.  I shouldn't wonder if it 
might have already given rise to the painfullest mistakes even in 
the neighbours' minds, not mentioning (if such a thing was 
possible) my little woman.  Whereas, goodness knows," says Mr. 
Snagsby, shaking his head, "I never had an idea of a foreign 
female, except as being formerly connected with a bunch of brooms 
and a baby, or at the present time with a tambourine and earrings.  
I never had, I do assure you, sir!"

Mr. Tulkinghorn had listened gravely to this complaint and inquires 
when the stationer has finished, "And that's all, is it, Snagsby?"

"Why yes, sir, that's all," says Mr. Snagsby, ending with a cough 
that plainly adds, "and it's enough too--for me."

"I don't know what Mademoiselle Hortense may want or mean, unless 
she is mad," says the lawyer.

"Even if she was, you know, sir," Mr. Snagsby pleads, "it wouldn't 
be a consolation to have some weapon or another in the form of a 
foreign dagger planted in the family."

"No," says the other.  "Well, well!  This shall be stopped.  I am 
sorry you have been inconvenienced.  If she comes again, send her 
here."

Mr. Snagsby, with much bowing and short apologetic coughing, takes 
his leave, lightened in heart.  Mr. Tulkinghorn goes upstairs, 
saying to himself, "These women were created to give trouble the 
whole earth over.  The mistress not being enough to deal with, 
here's the maid now!  But I will be short with THIS jade at least!"

So saying, he unlocks his door, gropes his way into his murky 
rooms, lights his candles, and looks about him.  It is too dark to 
see much of the Allegory over-head there, but that importunate 
Roman, who is for ever toppling out of the clouds and pointing, is 
at his old work pretty distinctly.  Not honouring him with much 
attention, Mr. Tulkinghorn takes a small key from his pocket, 
unlocks a drawer in which there is another key, which unlocks a 
chest in which there is another, and so comes to the cellar-key, 
with which he prepares to descend to the regions of old wine.  He 
is going towards the door with a candle in his hand when a knock 
comes.

"Who's this?  Aye, aye, mistress, it's you, is it?  You appear at a 
good time.  I have just been hearing of you.  Now! What do you 
want?"

He stands the candle on the chimney-piece in the clerk's hall and 
taps his dry cheek with the key as he addresses these words of 
welcome to Mademoiselle Hortense.  That feline personage, with her 
lips tightly shut and her eyes looking out at him sideways, softly 
closes the door before replying.

"I have had great deal of trouble to find you, sir."

"HAVE you!"

"I have been here very often, sir.  It has always been said to me, 
he is not at home, he is engage, he is this and that, he is not for 
you."

"Quite right, and quite true."

"Not true.  Lies!"

At times there is a suddenness in the manner of Mademoiselle 
Hortense so like a bodily spring upon the subject of it that such 
subject involuntarily starts and fails back.  It is Mr. 
Tulkinghorn's case at present, though Mademoiselle Hortense, with 
her eyes almost shut up (but still looking out sideways), is only 
smiling contemptuously and shaking her head.

"Now, mistress," says the lawyer, tapping the key hastily upon the 
chimney-piece.  "If you have anything to say, say it, say it."

"Sir, you have not use me well.  You have been mean and shabby."

"Mean and shabby, eh?" returns the lawyer, rubbing his nose with 
the key.

"Yes.  What is it that I tell you?  You know you have.  You have 
attrapped me--catched me--to give you information; you have asked 
me to show you the dress of mine my Lady must have wore that night, 
you have prayed me to come in it here to meet that boy.  Say! Is it 
not?"  Mademoiselle Hortense makes another spring.

"You are a vixen, a vixen!"  Mr. Tulkinghorn seems to meditate as 
he looks distrustfully at her, then he replies, "Well, wench, well.  
I paid you."

"You paid me!" she repeats with fierce disdain.  "Two sovereign!  I 
have not change them, I re-fuse them, I des-pise them, I throw them 
from me!"  Which she literally does, taking them out of her bosom 
as she speaks and flinging them with such violence on the floor 
that they jerk up again into the light before they roll away into 
corners and slowly settle down there after spinning vehemently.

"Now!" says Mademoiselle Hortense, darkening her large eyes again.  
"You have paid me?  Eh, my God, oh yes!"

Mr. Tulkinghorn rubs his head with the key while she entertains 
herself with a sarcastic laugh.

"You must be rich, my fair friend," he composedly observes, "to 
throw money about in that way!"

"I AM rich," she returns.  "I am very rich in hate.  I hate my 
Lady, of all my heart.  You know that."

"Know it?  How should I know it?"

"Because you have known it perfectly before you prayed me to give 
you that information.  Because you have known perfectly that I was 
en-r-r-r-raged!"  It appears impossible for mademoiselle to roll 
the letter "r" sufficiently in this word, notwithstanding that she 
assists her energetic delivery by clenching both her hands and 
setting all her teeth.

"Oh! I knew that, did I?" says Mr. Tulkinghorn, examining the wards 
of the key.

"Yes, without doubt.  I am not blind.  You have made sure of me 
because you knew that.  You had reason!  I det-est her."  
Mademoiselle folds her arms and throws this last remark at him over 
one of her shoulders.

"Having said this, have you anything else to say, mademoiselle?"

"I am not yet placed.  Place me well.  Find me a good condition!  
If you cannot, or do not choose to do that, employ me to pursue 
her, to chase her, to disgrace and to dishonour her.  I will help 
you well, and with a good will.  It is what YOU do.  Do I not know 
that?"

"You appear to know a good deal," Mr. Tulkinghorn retorts.

"Do I not?  Is it that I am so weak as to believe, like a child, 
that I come here in that dress to rec-cive that boy only to decide 
a little bet, a wager?  Eh, my God, oh yes!"  In this reply, down 
to the word "wager" inclusive, mademoiselle has been ironically 
polite and tender, then as suddenly dashed into the bitterest and 
most defiant scorn, with her black eyes in one and the same moment 
very nearly shut and staringly wide open.

"Now, let us see," says Mr. Tulkinghorn, tapping his chin with the 
key and looking imperturbably at her, "how this matter stands."

"Ah! Let us see," mademoiselle assents, with many angry and tight 
nods of her head.

"You come here to make a remarkably modest demand, which you have 
just stated, and it not being conceded, you will come again."

"And again," says mademoiselle with more tight and angry nods.  
"And yet again.  And yet again.  And many times again.  In effect, 
for ever!"

"And not only here, but you will go to Mr, Snagsby's too, perhaps?  
That visit not succeeding either, you will go again perhaps?"

"And again," repeats mademoiselle, cataleptic with determination.  
"And yet again.  And yet again.  And many times again.  In effect, 
for ever!"

"Very well.  Now, Mademoiselle Hortense, let me recommend you to 
take the candle and pick up that money of yours.  I think you will 
find it behind the clerk's partition in the corner yonder."

She merely throws a laugh over her shoulder and stands her ground 
with folded arms.

"You will not, eh?"

"No, I will not!"

"So much the poorer you; so much the richer I!  Look, mistress, 
this is the key of my wine-cellar.  It is a large key, but the keys 
of prisons are larger.  In this city there are houses of correction 
(where the treadmills are, for women), the gates of which are very 
strong and heavy, and no doubt the keys too.  I am afraid a lady of 
your spirit and activity would find it an inconvenience to have one 
of those keys turned upon her for any length of time.  What do you 
think?"

"I think," mademoiselle replies without any action and in a clear, 
obliging voice, "that you are a miserable wretch."

"Probably," returns Mr. Tulkinghorn, quietly blowing his nose.  
"But I don't ask what you think of myself; I ask what you think of 
the prison."

"Nothing.  What does it matter to me?"

"Why, it matters this much, mistress," says the lawyer, 
deliberately putting away his handkerchief and adjusting his frill; 
"the law is so despotic here that it interferes to prevent any of 
our good English citizens from being troubled, even by a lady's 
visits against his desire.  And on his complaining that he is so 
troubled, it takes hold of the troublesome lady and shuts her up in 
prison under hard discipline.  Turns the key upon her, mistress."  
Illustrating with the cellar-key.

"Truly?" returns mademoiselle in the same pleasant voice.  "That is 
droll!  But--my faith! --still what does it matter to me?"

"My fair friend," says Mr. Tulkinghorn, "make another visit here, 
or at Mr. Snagsby's, and you shall learn."

"In that case you will send me to the prison, perhaps?"

"Perhaps."

It would be contradictory for one in mademoiselle's state of 
agreeable jocularity to foam at the mouth, otherwise a tigerish 
expansion thereabouts might look as if a very little more would 
make her do it.

"In a word, mistress," says Mr. Tulkinghorn, "I am sorry to be 
unpolite, but if you ever present yourself uninvited here--or 
there--again, I will give you over to the police.  Their gallantry 
is great, but they carry troublesome people through the streets in 
an ignominious manner, strapped down on a board, my good wench."

"I will prove you," whispers mademoiselle, stretching out her hand, 
"I will try if you dare to do it!"

"And if," pursues the lawyer without minding her, "I place you in 
that good condition of being locked up in jail, it will be some 
time before you find yourself at liberty again."

"I will prove you," repeats mademoiselle in her former whisper.

"And now," proceeds the lawyer, still without minding her, "you had 
better go.  Think twice before you come here again."

"Think you," she answers, "twice two hundred times!"

"You were dismissed by your lady, you know," Mr. Tulkinghorn 
observes, following her out upon the staircase, "as the most 
implacable and unmanageable of women.  Now turn over a new leaf and 
take warning by what I say to you.  For what I say, I mean; and 
what I threaten, I will do, mistress."

She goes down without answering or looking behind her.  When she is 
gone, he goes down too, and returning with his cobweb-covered 
bottle, devotes himself to a leisurely enjoyment of its contents, 
now and then, as he throws his head back in his chair, catching 
sight of the pertinacious Roman pointing from the ceiling.



CHAPTER XLIII

Esther's Narrative


It matters little now how much I thought of my living mother who 
had told me evermore to consider her dead.  I could not venture to 
approach her or to communicate with her in writing, for my sense of 
the peril in which her life was passed was only to be equalled by 
my fears of increasing it.  Knowing that my mere existence as a 
living creature was an unforeseen danger in her way, I could not 
always conquer that terror of myself which had seized me when I 
first knew the secret.  At no time did I dare to utter her name.  I 
felt as if I did not even dare to hear it.  If the conversation 
anywhere, when I was present, took that direction, as it sometimes 
naturally did, I tried not to hear: I mentally counted, repeated 
something that I knew, or went out of the room.  I am conscious now 
that I often did these things when there can have been no danger of 
her being spoken of, but I did them in the dread I had of hearing 
anything that might lead to her betrayal, and to her betrayal 
through me.

It matters little now how often I recalled the tones of my mother's 
voice, wondered whether I should ever hear it again as I so longed 
to do, and thought how strange and desolate it was that it should 
be so new to me.  It matters little that I watched for every public 
mention of my mother's name; that I passed and repassed the door of 
her house in town, loving it, but afraid to look at it; that I once 
sat in the theatre when my mother was there and saw me, and when we 
were so wide asunder before the great company of all degrees that 
any link or confidence between us seemed a dream.  It is all, all 
over.  My lot has been so blest that I can relate little of myself 
which is not a story of goodness and generosity in others.  I may 
well pass that little and go on.

When we were settled at home again, Ada and I had many 
conversations with my guardian of which Richard was the theme.  My 
dear girl was deeply grieved that he should do their kind cousin so 
much wrong, but she was so faithful to Richard that she could not 
bear to blame him even for that.  My guardian was assured of it, 
and never coupled his name with a word of reproof.  "Rick is 
mistaken, my dear," he would say to her.  "Well, well!  We have all 
been mistaken over and over again.  We must trust to you and time 
to set him right."

We knew afterwards what we suspected then, that he did not trust to 
time until he had often tried to open Richard's eyes.  That he had 
written to him, gone to him, talked with him, tried every gentle 
and persuasive art his kindness could devise.  Our poor devoted 
Richard was deaf and blind to all.  If he were wrong, he would make 
amends when the Chancery suit was over.  If he were groping in the 
dark, he could not do better than do his utmost to clear away those 
clouds in which so much was confused and obscured.  Suspicion and 
misunderstanding were the fault of the suit?  Then let him work the 
suit out and come through it to his right mind.  This was his 
unvarying reply.  Jarndyce and Jarndyce had obtained such 
possession of his whole nature that it was impossible to place any 
consideration before him which he did not, with a distorted kind of 
reason, make a new argument in favour of his doing what he did.  
"So that it is even more mischievous," said my guardian once to me, 
"to remonstrate with the poor dear fellow than to leave him alone."

I took one of these opportunities of mentioning my doubts of Mr. 
Skimpole as a good adviser for Richard.

"Adviser!" returned my guardian, laughing, "My dear, who would 
advise with Skimpole?"

"Encourager would perhaps have been a better word," said I.

"Encourager!" returned my guardian again.  "Who could be encouraged 
by Skimpole?"

"Not Richard?" I asked.

"No," he replied.  "Such an unworldly, uncalculating, gossamer 
creature is a relief to him and an amusement.  But as to advising 
or encouraging or occupying a serious station towards anybody or 
anything, it is simply not to be thought of in such a child as 
Skimpole."

"Pray, cousin John," said Ada, who had just joined us and now 
looked over my shoulder, "what made him such a child?"

"What made him such a child?" inquired my guardian, rubbing his 
head, a little at a loss.

"Yes, cousin John."

"Why," he slowly replied, roughening his head more and more, "he is 
all sentiment, and--and susceptibility, and--and sensibility, and--
and imagination.  And these qualities are not regulated in him, 
somehow.  I suppose the people who admired him for them in his 
youth attached too much importance to them and too little to any 
training that would have balanced and adjusted them, and so he 
became what he is.  Hey?" said my guardian, stopping short and 
looking at us hopefully.  "What do you think, you two?"

Ada, glancing at me, said she thought it was a pity he should be an 
expense to Richard.

"So it is, so it is," returned my guardian hurriedly.  "That must 
not be.  We must arrange that.  I must prevent it.  That will never 
do."

And I said I thought it was to be regretted that he had ever 
introduced Richard to Mr. Vholes for a present of five pounds.

"Did he?" said my guardian with a passing shade of vexation on his 
face.  "But there you have the man.  There you have the man!  There 
is nothing mercenary in that with him.  He has no idea of the value 
of money.  He introduces Rick, and then he is good friends with Mr. 
Vholes and borrows five pounds of him.  He means nothing by it and 
thinks nothing of it.  He told you himself, I'll be bound, my 
dear?"

"Oh, yes!" said I.

"Exactly!" cried my guardian, quite triumphant.  "There you have 
the man!  If he had meant any harm by it or was conscious of any 
harm in it, he wouldn't tell it.  He tells it as he does it in mere 
simplicity.  But you shall see him in his own home, and then you'll 
understand him better.  We must pay a visit to Harold Skimpole and 
caution him on these points.  Lord bless you, my dears, an infant, 
an infant!"

In pursuance of this plan, we went into London on an early day and 
presented ourselves at Mr. Skimpole's door.

He lived in a place called the Polygon, in Somers Town, where there 
were at that time a number of poor Spanish refugees walking about 
in cloaks, smoking little paper cigars.  Whether he was a better 
tenant than one might have supposed, in consequence of his friend 
Somebody always paying his rent at last, or whether his inaptitude 
for business rendered it particularly difficult to turn him out, I 
don't know; but he had occupied the same house some years.  It was 
in a state of dilapidation quite equal to our expectation.  Two or 
three of the area railings were gone, the water-butt was broken, 
the knocker was loose, the bell-handle had been pulled off a long 
time to judge from the rusty state of the wire, and dirty 
footprints on the steps were the only signs of its being inhabited.

A slatternly full-blown girl who seemed to be bursting out at the 
rents in her gown and the cracks in her shoes like an over-ripe 
berry answered our knock by opening the door a very little way and 
stopping up the gap with her figure.  As she knew Mr. Jarndyce 
(indeed Ada and I both thought that she evidently associated him 
with the receipt of her wages), she immediately relented and 
allowed us to pass in.  The lock of the door being in a disabled 
condition, she then applied herself to securing it with the chain, 
which was not in good action either, and said would we go upstairs?

We went upstairs to the first floor, still seeing no other 
furniture than the dirty footprints.  Mr. Jarndyce without further 
ceremony entered a room there, and we followed.  It was dingy 
enough and not at all clean, but furnished with an odd kind of 
shabby luxury, with a large footstool, a sofa, and plenty of 
cushions, an easy-chair, and plenty of pillows, a piano, books, 
drawing materials, music, newspapers, and a few sketches and 
pictures.  A broken pane of glass in one of the dirty windows was 
papered and wafered over, but there was a little plate of hothouse 
nectarines on the table, and there was another of grapes, and 
another of sponge-cakes, and there was a bottle of light wine.  Mr. 
Skimpole himself reclined upon the sofa in a dressing-gown, 
drinking some fragrant coffee from an old china cup--it was then 
about mid-day--and looking at a collection of wallflowers in the 
balcony.

He was not in the least disconcerted by our appearance, but rose 
and received us in his usual airy manner.

"Here I am, you see!" he said when we were seated, not without some 
little difficulty, the greater part of the chairs being broken.  
"Here I am!  This is my frugal breakfast.  Some men want legs of 
beef and mutton for breakfast; I don't.  Give me my peach, my cup 
of coffee, and my claret; I am content.  I don't want them for 
themselves, but they remind me of the sun.  There's nothing solar 
about legs of beef and mutton.  Mere animal satisfaction!"

"This is our friend's consulting-room (or would be, if he ever 
prescribed), his sanctum, his studio," said my guardian to us.

"Yes," said Mr. Skimpole, turning his bright face about, "this is 
the bird's cage.  This is where the bird lives and sings.  They 
pluck his feathers now and then and clip his wings, but he sings, 
he sings!"

He handed us the grapes, repeating in his radiant way, "He sings!  
Not an ambitious note, but still he sings."

"These are very fine," said my guardian.  "A present?"

"No," he answered.  "No! Some amiable gardener sells them.  His man 
wanted to know, when he brought them last evening, whether he 
should wait for the money.  'Really, my friend,' I said, 'I think 
not--if your time is of any value to you.'  I suppose it was, for 
he went away."

My guardian looked at us with a smile, as though he asked us, "Is 
it possible to be worldly with this baby?"

"This is a day," said Mr. Skimpole, gaily taking a little claret in 
a tumbler, "that will ever be remembered here.  We shall call it 
Saint Clare and Saint Summerson day.  You must see my daughters.  I 
have a blue-eyed daughter who is my Beauty daughter, I have a 
Sentiment daughter, and I have a Comedy daughter.  You must see 
them all.  They'll be enchanted."

He was going to summon them when my guardian interposed and asked 
him to pause a moment, as he wished to say a word to him first.  
"My dear Jarndyce," he cheerfully replied, going back to his sofa, 
"as many moments as you please.  Time is no object here.  We never 
know what o'clock it is, and we never care.  Not the way to get on 
in life, you'll tell me?  Certainly.  But we DON'T get on in life.  
We don't pretend to do it."

My guardian looked at us again, plainly saying, "You hear him?"

"Now, Harold," he began, "the word I have to say relates to Rick."

"The dearest friend I have!" returned Mr. Skimpole cordially.  "I 
suppose he ought not to be my dearest friend, as he is not on terms 
with you.  But he is, I can't help it; he is full of youthful 
poetry, and I love him.  If you don't like it, I can't help it.  I 
love him."

The engaging frankness with which he made this declaration really 
had a disinterested appearance and captivated my guardian, if not, 
for the moment, Ada too.

"You are welcome to love him as much as you like," returned Mr. 
Jarndyce, "but we must save his pocket, Harold."

"Oh!" said Mr. Skimpole.  "His pocket?  Now you are coming to what 
I don't understand."  Taking a little more claret and dipping one 
of the cakes in it, he shook his head and smiled at Ada and me with 
an ingenuous foreboding that he never could be made to understand.

"If you go with him here or there," said my guardian plainly, "you 
must not let him pay for both."

"My dear Jarndyce," returned Mr. Skimpole, his genial face 
irradiated by the comicality of this idea, "what am I to do?  If he 
takes me anywhere, I must go.  And how can I pay?  I never have any 
money.  If I had any money, I don't know anything about it.  
Suppose I say to a man, how much?  Suppose the man says to me seven 
and sixpence?  I know nothing about seven and sixpence.  It is 
impossible for me to pursue the subject with any consideration for 
the man.  I don't go about asking busy people what seven and 
sixpence is in Moorish--which I don't understand.  Why should I go 
about asking them what seven and sixpence is in Money--which I 
don't understand?"

"Well," said my guardian, by no means displeased with this artless 
reply, "if you come to any kind of journeying with Rick, you must 
borrow the money of me (never breathing the least allusion to that 
circumstance), and leave the calculation to him."

"My dear Jarndyce," returned Mr. Skimpole, "I will do anything to 
give you pleasure, but it seems an idle form--a superstition.  
Besides, I give you my word, Miss Clare and my dear Miss Summerson, 
I thought Mr. Carstone was immensely rich.  I thought he had only 
to make over something, or to sign a bond, or a draft, or a cheque, 
or a bill, or to put something on a file somewhere, to bring down a 
shower of money."

"Indeed it is not so, sir," said Ada.  "He is poor."

"No, really?" returned Mr. Skimpole with his bright smile.  "You 
surprise me.

"And not being the richer for trusting in a rotten reed," said my 
guardian, laying his hand emphatically on the sleeve of Mr. 
Skimpole's dressing-gown, "be you very careful not to encourage him 
in that reliance, Harold."

"My dear good friend," returned Mr. Skimpole, "and my dear Miss 
Siunmerson, and my dear Miss Clare, how can I do that?  It's 
business, and I don't know business.  It is he who encourages me.  
He emerges from great feats of business, presents the brightest 
prospects before me as their result, and calls upon me to admire 
them.  I do admire them--as bright prospects.  But I know no more 
about them, and I tell him so."

The helpless kind of candour with which he presented this before 
us, the light-hearted manner in which he was amused by his 
innocence, the fantastic way in which he took himself under his own 
protection and argued about that curious person, combined with the 
delightful ease of everything he said exactly to make out my 
guardian's case.  The more I saw of him, the more unlikely it 
seemed to me, when he was present, that he could design, conceal, 
or influence anything; and yet the less likely that appeared when 
he was not present, and the less agreeable it was to think of his 
having anything to do with any one for whom I cared.

Hearing that his examination (as he called it) was now over, Mr. 
Skimpole left the room with a radiant face to fetch his daughters 
(his sons had run away at various times), leaving my guardian quite 
delighted by the manner in which he had vindicated his childish 
character.  He soon came back, bringing with him the three young 
ladies and Mrs. Skimpole, who had once been a beauty but was now a 
delicate high-nosed invalid suffering under a complication of 
disorders.

"This," said Mr. Skimpole, "is my Beauty daughter, Arethusa--plays 
and sings odds and ends like her father.  This is my Sentiment 
daughter, Laura--plays a little but don't sing.  This is my Comedy 
daughter, Kitty--sings a little but don't play.  We all draw a 
little and compose a little, and none of us have any idea of time 
or money."

Mrs. Skimpole sighed, I thought, as if she would have been glad to 
strike out this item in the family attainments.  I also thought 
that she rather impressed her sigh upon my guardian and that she 
took every opportunity of throwing in another.

"It is pleasant," said Mr. Skimpole, turning his sprightly eyes 
from one to the other of us, "and it is whimsically interesting to 
trace peculiarities in families.  In this family we are all 
children, and I am the youngest."

The daughters, who appeared to be very fond of him, were amused by 
this droll fact, particularly the Comedy daughter.

"My dears, it is true," said Mr. Skimpole, "is it not?  So it is, 
and so it must be, because like the dogs in the hymn, 'it is our 
nature to.'  Now, here is Miss Summerson with a fine administrative 
capacity and a knowledge of details perfectly surprising.  It will 
sound very strange in Miss Summerson's ears, I dare say, that we 
know nothing about chops in this house.  But we don't, not the 
least.  We can't cook anything whatever.  A needle and thread we 
don't know how to use.  We admire the people who possess the 
practical wisdom we want, but we don't quarrel with them.  Then why 
should they quarrel with us?  Live and let live, we say to them.  
Live upon your practical wisdom, and let us live upon you!"

He laughed, but as usual seemed quite candid and really to mean 
what he said.

"We have sympathy, my roses," said Mr. Skimpole, "sympathy for 
everything.  Have we not?"

"Oh, yes, papa!" cried the three daughters.

"In fact, that is our family department," said Mr. Skimpole, "in 
this hurly-burly of life.  We are capable of looking on and of 
being interested, and we DO look on, and we ARE interested.  What 
more can we do?  Here is my Beauty daughter, married these three 
years.  Now I dare say her marrying another child, and having two 
more, was all wrong in point of political economy, but it was very 
agreeable.  We had our little festivities on those occasions and 
exchanged social ideas.  She brought her young husband home one 
day, and they and their young fledglings have their nest upstairs.  
I dare say at some time or other Sentiment and Comedy will bring 
THEIR husbands home and have THEIR nests upstairs too.  So we get 
on, we don't know how, but somehow."

She looked very young indeed to be the mother of two children, and 
I could not help pitying both her and them.  It was evident that 
the three daughters had grown up as they could and had had just as 
little haphazard instruction as qualified them to be their father's 
playthings in his idlest hours.  His pictorial tastes were 
consulted, I observed, in their respective styles of wearing their 
hair, the Beauty daughter being in the classic manner, the 
Sentiment daughter luxuriant and flowing, and the Comedy daughter 
in the arch style, with a good deal of sprightly forehead, and 
vivacious little curls dotted about the corners of her eyes.  They 
were dressed to correspond, though in a most untidy and negligent 
way.

Ada and I conversed with these young ladies and found them 
wonderfully like their father.  In the meanwhile Mr. Jarndyce (who 
had been rubbing his head to a great extent, and hinted at a change 
in the wind) talked with Mrs. Skimpole in a corner, where we could 
not help hearing the chink of money.  Mr. Skimpole had previously 
volunteered to go home with us and had withdrawn to dress himself 
for the purpose.

"My roses," he said when he came back, "take care of mama.  She is 
poorly to-day.  By going home with Mr. Jarndyce for a day or two, I 
shall hear the larks sing and preserve my amiability.  It has been 
tried, you know, and would be tried again if I remained at home."

"That bad man!" said the Comedy daughter.

"At the very time when he knew papa was lying ill by his 
wallflowers, looking at the blue sky," Laura complained.

"And when the smell of hay was in the air!" said Arethusa.

"It showed a want of poetry in the man," Mr. Skimpole assented, but 
with perfect good humour.  "It was coarse.  There was an absence of 
the finer touches of humanity in it!  My daughters have taken great 
offence," he explained to us, "at an honest man--"

"Not honest, papa.  Impossible!" they all three protested.

"At a rough kind of fellow--a sort of human hedgehog rolled up," 
said Mr. Skimpole, "who is a baker in this neighbourhood and from 
whom we borrowed a couple of armchairs.  We wanted a couple of arm-
chairs, and we hadn't got them, and therefore of course we looked 
to a man who HAD got them, to lend them.  Well! This morose person 
lent them, and we wore them out.  When they were worn out, he 
wanted them back.  He had them back.  He was contented, you will 
say.  Not at all.  He objected to their being worn.  I reasoned 
with him, and pointed out his mistake.  I said, 'Can you, at your 
time of life, be so headstrong, my friend, as to persist that an 
arm-chair is a thing to put upon a shelf and look at?  That it is 
an object to contemplate, to survey from a distance, to consider 
from a point of sight?  Don't you KNOW that these arm-chairs were 
borrowed to be sat upon?'  He was unreasonable and unpersuadable 
and used intemperate language.  Being as patient as I am at this 
minute, I addressed another appeal to him.  I said, 'Now, my good 
man, however our business capacities may vary, we are all children 
of one great mother, Nature.  On this blooming summer morning here 
you see me' (I was on the sofa) 'with flowers before me, fruit upon 
the table, the cloudless sky above me, the air full of fragrance, 
contemplating Nature.  I entreat you, by our common brotherhood, 
not to interpose between me and a subject so sublime, the absurd 
figure of an angry baker!'  But he did," said Mr. Skimpole, raising 
his laughing eyes in playful astonishinent; "he did interpose that 
ridiculous figure, and he does, and he will again.  And therefore I 
am very glad to get out of his way and to go home with my friend 
Jarndyce."

It seemed to escape his consideration that Mrs. Skimpole and the 
daughters remained behind to encounter the baker, but this was so 
old a story to all of them that it had become a matter of course.  
He took leave of his family with a tenderness as airy and graceful 
as any other aspect in which he showed himself and rode away with 
us in perfect harmony of mind.  We had an opportunity of seeing 
through some open doors, as we went downstairs, that his own 
apartment was a palace to the rest of the house.

I could have no anticipation, and I had none, that something very 
startling to me at the moment, and ever memorable to me in what 
ensued from it, was to happen before this day was out.  Our guest 
was in such spirits on the way home that I could do nothing but 
listen to him and wonder at him; nor was I alone in this, for Ada 
yielded to the same fascination.  As to my guardian, the wind, 
which had threatened to become fixed in the east when we left 
Somers Town, veered completely round before we were a couple of 
miles from it.

Whether of questionable childishness or not in any other matters, 
Mr. Skimpole had a child's enjoyment of change and bright weather.  
In no way wearied by his sallies on the road, he was in the 
drawing-room before any of us; and I heard him at the piano while I 
was yet looking after my housekeeping, singing refrains of 
barcaroles and drinking songs, Italian and German, by the score.

We were all assembled shortly before dinner, and he was still at 
the piano idly picking out in his luxurious way little strains of 
music, and talking between whiles of finishing some sketches of the 
ruined old Verulam wall to-morrow, which he had begun a year or two 
ago and had got tired of, when a card was brought in and my 
guardian read aloud in a surprised voice, "Sir Leicester Dedlock!"

The visitor was in the room while it was yet turning round with me 
and before I had the power to stir.  If I had had it, I should have 
hurried away.  I had not even the presence of mind, in my 
giddiness, to retire to Ada in the window, or to see the window, or 
to know where it was.  I heard my name and found that my guardian 
was presenting me before I could move to a chair.

"Pray be seated, Sir Leicester."

"Mr. Jarndyce," said Sir Leicester in reply as he bowed and seated 
himself, "I do myself the honour of calling here--"

"You do ME the honour, Sir Leicester."

"Thank you--of calling here on my road from Lincolnshire to express 
my regret that any cause of complaint, however strong, that I may 
have against a gentleman who--who is known to you and has been your 
host, and to whom therefore I will make no farther reference, 
should have prevented you, still more ladies under your escort and 
charge, from seeing whatever little there may be to gratify a 
polite and refined taste at my house, Chesney Wold."

"You are exceedingly obliging, Sir Leicester, and on behalf of 
those ladies (who are present) and for myself, I thank you very 
much."

"It is possible, Mr. Jarndyce, that the gentleman to whom, for the 
reasons I have mentioned, I refrain from making further allusion--
it is possible, Mr. Jarndyce, that that gentleman may have done me 
the honour so far to misapprehend my character as to induce you to 
believe that you would not have been received by my local 
establishment in Lincolnshire with that urbanity, that courtesy, 
which its members are instructed to show to all ladies and 
gentlemen who present themselves at that house.  I merely beg to 
observe, sir, that the fact is the reverse."

My guardian delicately dismissed this remark without making any 
verbal answer.

"It has given me pain, Mr. Jarndyce," Sir Leicester weightily 
proceeded.  "I assure you, sir, it has given--me--pain--to learn 
from the housekeeper at Chesney Wold that a gentleman who was in 
your company in that part of the county, and who would appear to 
possess a cultivated taste for the fine arts, was likewise deterred 
by some such cause from examining the family pictures with that 
leisure, that attention, that care, which he might have desired to 
bestow upon them and which some of them might possibly have 
repaid."  Here he produced a card and read, with much gravity and a 
little trouble, through his eye-glass, "Mr. Hirrold--Herald--
Harold--Skampling--Skumpling--I beg your pardon--Skimpole."

"This is Mr. Harold Skimpole," said my guardian, evidently 
surprised.

"Oh!" exclaimed Sir Leicester, "I am happy to meet Mr. Skimpole and 
to have the opportunity of tendering my personal regrets.  I hope, 
sir, that when you again find yourself in my part of the county, 
you will be under no similar sense of restraint."

"You are very obliging, Sir Leicester Dedlock.  So encouraged, I 
shall certainly give myself the pleasure and advantage of another 
visit to your beautiful house.  The owners of such places as 
Chesney Wold," said Mr. Skimpole with his usual happy and easy air, 
"are public benefactors.  They are good enough to maintain a number 
of delightful objects for the admiration and pleasure of us poor 
men; and not to reap all the admiration and pleasure that they 
yield is to be ungrateful to our benefactors."

Sir Leicester seemed to approve of this sentiment highly.  "An 
artist, sir?"

"No," returned Mr. Skimpole.  "A perfectly idle man.  A mere 
amateur."

Sir Leicester seemed to approve of this even more.  He hoped he 
might have the good fortune to be at Chesney Wold when Mr. Skimpole 
next came down into Lincolnshire.  Mr. Skimpole professed himself 
much flattered and honoured.

"Mr. Skimpole mentioned," pursued Sir Leicester, addressing himself 
again to my guardian, "mentioned to the house-keeper, who, as he 
may have observed, is an old and attached retainer of the family--"

("That is, when I walked through the house the other day, on the 
occasion of my going down to visit Miss Summerson and Miss Clare," 
Mr. Skimpole airily explained to us.)

"--That the friend with whom he had formerly been staying there was 
Mr. Jarndyce."  Sir Leicester bowed to the bearer of that name.  
"And hence I became aware of the circumstance for which I have 
professed my regret.  That this should have occurred to any 
gentleman, Mr. Jarndyce, but especially a gentleman formerly known 
to Lady Dedlock, and indeed claiming some distant connexion with 
her, and for whom (as I learn from my Lady herself) she entertains 
a high respect, does, I assure you, give--me--pain."

"Pray say no more about it, Sir Leicester," returned my guardian.  
"I am very sensible, as I am sure we all are, of your 
consideration.  Indeed the mistake was mine, and I ought to 
apologize for it."

I had not once looked up.  I had not seen the visitor and had not 
even appeared to myself to hear the conversation.  It surprises me 
to find that I can recall it, for it seemed to make no impression 
on me as it passed.  I heard them speaking, but my mind was so 
confused and my instinctive avoidance of this gentleman made his 
presence so distressing to me that I thought I understood nothing, 
through the rushing in my head and the beating of my heart.

"I mentioned the subject to Lady Dedlock," said Sir Leicester, 
rising, "and my Lady informed me that she had had the pleasure of 
exchanging a few words with Mr. Jarndyce and his wards on the 
occasion of an accidental meeting during their sojourn in the 
vicinity.  Permit me, Mr. Jarndyce, to repeat to yourself, and to 
these ladies, the assurance I have already tendered to Mr. 
Skimpole.  Circumstances undoubtedly prevent my saying that it 
would afford me any gratification to hear that Mr. Boythorn had 
favoured my house with his presence, but those circumstances are 
confined to that gentleman himself and do not extend beyond him."

"You know my old opinion of him," said Mr. Skimpole, lightly 
appealing to us.  "An amiable bull who is detenined to make every 
colour scarlet!"

Sir Leicester Dedlock coughed as if he could not possibly hear 
another word in reference to such an individual and took his leave 
with great ceremony and politeness.  I got to my own room with all 
possible speed and remained there until I had recovered my self-
command.  It had been very much disturbed, but I was thankful to 
find when I went downstairs again that they only rallied me for 
having been shy and mute before the great Lincolnshire baronet.

By that time I had made up my mind that the period was come when I 
must tell my guardian what I knew.  The possibility of my being 
brought into contact with my mother, of my being taken to her 
house, even of Mr. Skimpole's, however distantly associated with 
me, receiving kindnesses and obligations from her husband, was so 
painful that I felt I could no longer guide myself without his 
assistance.

When we had retired for the night, and Ada and I had had our usual 
talk in our pretty room, I went out at my door again and sought my 
guardian among his books.  I knew he always read at that hour, and 
as I drew near I saw the light shining out into the passage from 
his reading-lamp.

"May I come in, guardian?"

"Surely, little woman.  What's the matter?"

"Nothing is the matter.  I thought I would like to take this quiet 
time of saying a word to you about myself."

He put a chair for me, shut his book, and put it by, and turned his 
kind attentive face towards me.  I could not help observing that it 
wore that curious expression I had observed in it once before--on 
that night when he had said that he was in no trouble which I could 
readily understand.

"What concerns you, my dear Esther," said he, "concerns us all.  
You cannot be more ready to speak than I am to hear."

"I know that, guardian.  But I have such need of your advice and 
support.  Oh! You don't know how much need I have to-night."

He looked unprepared for my being so earnest, and even a little 
alarmed.

"Or how anxious I have been to speak to you," said I, "ever since 
the visitor was here to-day."

"The visitor, my dear!  Sir Leicester Dedlock?"

"Yes."

He folded his arms and sat looking at me with an air of the 
profoundest astonishment, awaiting what I should say next.  I did 
not know how to prepare him.

"Why, Esther," said he, breaking into a smile, "our visitor and you 
are the two last persons on earth I should have thought of 
connecting together!"

"Oh, yes, guardian, I know it.  And I too, but a little while ago."

The smile passed from his face, and he became graver than before.  
He crossed to the door to see that it was shut (but I had seen to 
that) and resumed his seat before me.

"Guardian," said I, "do you remensher, when we were overtaken by 
the thunder-storm, Lady Dedlock's speaking to you of her sister?"

"Of course.  Of course I do."

"And reminding you that she and her sister had differed, had gone 
their several ways?"

"Of course."

"Why did they separate, guardian?"

His face quite altered as he looked at me.  "My child, what 
questions are these!  I never knew.  No one but themselves ever did 
know, I believe.  Who could tell what the secrets of those two 
handsome and proud women were!  You have seen Lady Dedlock.  If you 
had ever seen her sister, you would know her to have been as 
resolute and haughty as she."

"Oh, guardian, I have seen her many and many a time!"

"Seen her?"

He paused a little, biting his lip.  "Then, Esther, when you spoke 
to me long ago of Boythorn, and when I told you that he was all but 
married once, and that the lady did not die, but died to him, and 
that that time had had its influence on his later life--did you 
know it all, and know who the lady was?"

"No, guardian," I returned, fearful of the light that dimly broke 
upon me.  "Nor do I know yet."

"Lady Dedlock's sister."

"And why," I could scarcely ask him, "why, guardian, pray tell me 
why were THEY parted?"

"It was her act, and she kept its motives in her inflexible heart.  
He afterwards did conjecture (but it was mere conjecture) that some 
injury which her haughty spirit had received in her cause of 
quarrel with her sister had wounded her beyond all reason, but she 
wrote him that from the date of that letter she died to him--as in 
literal truth she did--and that the resolution was exacted from her 
by her knowledge of his proud temper and his strained sense of 
honour, which were both her nature too.  In consideration for those 
master points in him, and even in consideration for them in 
herself, she made the sacrifice, she said, and would live in it and 
die in it.  She did both, I fear; certainly he never saw her, never 
heard of her from that hour.  Nor did any one."

"Oh, guardian, what have I done!" I cried, giving way to my grief; 
"what sorrow have I innocently caused!"

"You caused, Esther?"

"Yes, guardian.  Innocently, but most surely.  That secluded sister 
is my first remembrance."

"No, no!" he cried, starting.

"Yes, guardian, yes!  And HER sister is my mother!"

I would have told him all my mother's letter, but he would not hear 
it then.  He spoke so tenderly and wisely to me, and he put so 
plainly before me all I had myself imperfectly thought and hoped in 
my better state of mind, that, penetrated as I had been with 
fervent gratitude towards him through so many years, I believed I 
had never loved him so dearly, never thanked him in my heart so 
fully, as I did that night.  And when he had taken me to my room 
and kissed me at the door, and when at last I lay down to sleep, my 
thought was how could I ever be busy enough, how could I ever be 
good enough, how in my little way could I ever hope to be forgetful 
enough of myself, devoted enough to him, and useful enough to 
others, to show him how I blessed and honoured him.



CHAPTER XLIV

The Letter and the Answer


My guardian called me into his room next morning, and then I told 
him what had been left untold on the previous night.  There was 
nothing to be done, he said, but to keep the secret and to avoid 
another such encounter as that of yesterday.  He understood my 
feeling and entirely shared it.  He charged himself even with 
restraining Mr. Skimpole from improving his opportunity.  One 
person whom he need not name to me, it was not now possible for him 
to advise or help.  He wished it were, but no such thing could be.  
If her mistrust of the lawyer whom she had mentioned were well-
founded, which he scarcely doubted, he dreaded discovery.  He knew 
something of him, both by sight and by reputation, and it was 
certain that he was a dangerous man.  Whatever happened, he 
repeatedly impressed upon me with anxious affection and kindness, I 
was as innocent of as himself and as unable to influence.

"Nor do I understand," said he, "that any doubts tend towards you, 
my dear.  Much suspicion may exist without that connexion."

"With the lawyer," I returned.  "But two other persons have come 
into my mind since I have been anxious.  Then I told him all about 
Mr. Guppy, who I feared might have had his vague surmises when I 
little understood his meaning, but in whose silence after our last 
interview I expressed perfect confidence.

"Well," said my guardian.  "Then we may dismiss him for the 
present.  Who is the other?"

I called to his recollection the French maid and the eager offer of 
herself she had made to me.

"Ha!" he returned thoughtfully.  "That is a more alarming person 
than the clerk.  But after all, my dear, it was but seeking for a 
new service.  She had seen you and Ada a little while before, and 
it was natural that you should come into her head.  She merely 
proposed herself for your maid, you know.  She did nothing more."

"Her manner was strange," said I.

"Yes, and her manner was strange when she took her shoes off and 
showed that cool relish for a walk that might have ended in her 
death-bed," said my guardian.  "It would be useless self-distress 
and torment to reckon up such chances and possibilities.  There are 
very few harmless circumstances that would not seem full of 
perilous meaning, so considered.  Be hopeful, little woman.  You 
can be nothing better than yourself; be that, through this 
knowledge, as you were before you had it.  It is the best you can 
do for everybody's sake.  I, sharing the secret with you--"

"And lightening it, guardian, so much," said I.

"--will be attentive to what passes in that family, so far as I can 
observe it from my distance.  And if the time should come when I 
can stretch out a hand to render the least service to one whom it 
is better not to name even here, I will not fail to do it for her 
dear daughter's sake."

I thanked him with my whole heart.  What could I ever do but thank 
him!  I was going out at the door when he asked me to stay a 
moment.  Quickly turning round, I saw that same expression on his 
face again; and all at once, I don't know how, it flashed upon me 
as a new and far-off possibility that I understood it.

"My dear Esther," said my guardian, "I have long had something in 
my thoughts that I have wished to say to you."

"Indeed?"

"I have had some difficulty in approaching it, and I still have.  I 
should wish it to be so deliberately said, and so deliberately 
considered.  Would you object to my writing it?"

"Dear guardian, how could I object to your writing anything for ME 
to read?"

"Then see, my love," said he with his cheery smile, "am I at this 
moment quite as plain and easy--do I seem as open, as honest and 
old-fashioned--as I am at any time?"

I answered in all earnestness, "Quite."  With the strictest truth, 
for his momentary hesitation was gone (it had not lasted a minute), 
and his fine, sensible, cordial, sterling manner was restored.

"Do I look as if I suppressed anything, meant anything but what I 
said, had any reservation at all, no matter what?" said he with his 
bright clear eyes on mine.

I answered, most assuredly he did not.

"Can you fully trust me, and thoroughly rely on what I profess, 
Esther?"

"Most thoroughly," said I with my whole heart.

"My dear girl," returned my guardian, "give me your hand."

He took it in his, holding me lightly with his arm, and looking 
down into my face with the same genuine freshness and faithfulness 
of manner--the old protecting manner which had made that house my 
home in a moment--said, "You have wrought changes in me, little 
woman, since the winter day in the stage-coach.  First and last you 
have done me a world of good since that time."

"Ah, guardian, what have you done for me since that time!"

"But," said he, "that is not to be remembered now."

"It never can be forgotten."

"Yes, Esther," said he with a gentle seriousness, "it is to be 
forgotten now, to be forgotten for a while.  You are only to 
remember now that nothing can change me as you know me.  Can you 
feel quite assured of that, my dear?"

"I can, and I do," I said.

"That's much," he answered.  "That's everything.  But I must not 
take that at a word.  I will not write this something in my 
thoughts until you have quite resolved within yourself that nothing 
can change me as you know me.  If you doubt that in the least 
degree, I will never write it.  If you are sure of that, on good 
consideration, send Charley to me this night week--'for the 
letter.'  But if you are not quite certain, never send.  Mind, I 
trust to your truth, in this thing as in everything.  If you are 
not quite certain on that one point, never send!"

"Guardian," said I, "I am already certain, I can no more be changed 
in that conviction than you can be changed towards me.  I shall 
send Charley for the letter."

He shook my hand and said no more.  Nor was any more said in 
reference to this conversation, either by him or me, through the 
whole week.  When the appointed night came, I said to Charley as 
soon as I was alone, "Go and knock at Mr. Jarndyce's door, Charley, 
and say you have come from me--'for the letter.'"  Charley went up 
the stairs, and down the stairs, and along the passages--the zig-
zag way about the old-fashioned house seemed very long in my 
listening ears that night--and so came back, along the passages, 
and down the stairs, and up the stairs, and brought the letter.  
"Lay it on the table, Charley," said I.  So Charley laid it on the 
table and went to bed, and I sat looking at it without taking it 
up, thinking of many things.

I began with my overshadowed childhood, and passed through those 
timid days to the heavy time when my aunt lay dead, with her 
resolute face so cold and set, and when I was more solitary with 
Mrs. Rachael than if I had had no one in the world to speak to or 
to look at.  I passed to the altered days when I was so blest as to 
find friends in all around me, and to be beloved.  I came to the 
time when I first saw my dear girl and was received into that 
sisterly affection which was the grace and beauty of my life.  I 
recalled the first bright gleam of welcome which had shone out of 
those very windows upon our expectant faces on that cold bright 
night, and which had never paled.  I lived my happy life there over 
again, I went through my illness and recovery, I thought of myself 
so altered and of those around me so unchanged; and all this 
happiness shone like a light from one central figure, represented 
before me by the letter on the table.

I opened it and read it.  It was so impressive in its love for me, 
and in the unselfish caution it gave me, and the consideration it 
showed for me in every word, that my eyes were too often blinded to 
read much at a time.  But I read it through three times before I 
laid it down.  I had thought beforehand that I knew its purport, 
and I did.  It asked me, would I be the mistress of Bleak House.

It was not a love letter, though it expressed so much love, but was 
written just as he would at any time have spoken to me.  I saw his 
face, and heard his voice, and felt the influence of his kind 
protecting manner in every line.  It addressed me as if our places 
were reversed, as if all the good deeds had been mine and all the 
feelings they had awakened his.  It dwelt on my being young, and he 
past the prime of life; on his having attained a ripe age, while I 
was a child; on his writing to me with a silvered head, and knowing 
all this so well as to set it in full before me for mature 
deliberation.  It told me that I would gain nothing by such a 
marriage and lose nothing by rejecting it, for no new relation 
could enhance the tenderness in which he held me, and whatever my 
decision was, he was certain it would be right.  But he had 
considered this step anew since our late confidence and had decided 
on taking it, if it only served to show me through one poor 
instance that the whole world would readily unite to falsify the 
stern prediction of my childhood.  I was the last to know what 
happiness I could bestow upon him, but of that he said no more, for 
I was always to remember that I owed him nothing and that he was my 
debtor, and for very much.  He had often thought of our future, and 
foreseeing that the time must come, and fearing that it might come 
soon, when Ada (now very nearly of age) would leave us, and when 
our present mode of life must be broken up, had become accustomed 
to reflect on this proposal.  Thus he made it.  If I felt that I 
could ever give him the best right he could have to be my 
protector, and if I felt that I could happily and justly become the 
dear companion of his remaining life, superior to all lighter 
chances and changes than death, even then he could not have me bind 
myself irrevocably while this letter was yet so new to me, but even 
then I must have ample time for reconsideration.  In that case, or 
in the opposite case, let him be unchanged in his old relation, in 
his old manner, in the old name by which I called him.  And as to 
his bright Dame Durden and little housekeeper, she would ever be 
the same, he knew.

This was the substance of the letter, written throughout with a 
justice and a dignity as if he were indeed my responsible guardian 
impartially representing the proposal of a friend against whom in 
his integrity he stated the full case.

But he did not hint to me that when I had been better looking he 
had had this same proceeding in his thoughts and had refrained from 
it.  That when my old face was gone from me, and I had no 
attractions, he could love me just as well as in my fairer days.  
That the discovery of my birth gave him no shock.  That his 
generosity rose above my disfigurement and my inheritance of shame.  
That the more I stood in need of such fidelity, the more firmly I 
might trust in him to the last.

But I knew it, I knew it well now.  It came upon me as the close of 
the benignant history I had been pursuing, and I felt that I had 
but one thing to do.  To devote my life to his happiness was to 
thank him poorly, and what had I wished for the other night but 
some new means of thanking him?

Still I cried very much, not only in the fullness of my heart after 
reading the letter, not only in the strangeness of the prospect--
for it was strange though I had expected the contents--but as if 
something for which there was no name or distinct idea were 
indefinitely lost to me.  I was very happy, very thankful, very 
hopeful; but I cried very much.

By and by I went to my old glass.  My eyes were red and swollen, 
and I said, "Oh, Esther, Esther, can that be you!"  I am afraid the 
face in the glass was going to cry again at this reproach, but I 
held up my finger at it, and it stopped.

"That is more like the composed look you comforted me with, my 
dear, when you showed me such a change!" said I, beginning to let 
down my hair.  "When you are mistress of Bleak House, you are to be 
as cheerful as a bird.  In fact, you are always to be cheerful; so 
let us begin for once and for all."

I went on with my hair now, quite comfortably.  I sobbed a little 
still, but that was because I had been crying, not because I was 
crying then.

"And so Esther, my dear, you are happy for life.  Happy with your 
best friends, happy in your old home, happy in the power of doing a 
great deal of good, and happy in the undeserved love of the best of 
men."

I thought, all at once, if my guardian had married some one else, 
how should I have felt, and what should I have done!  That would 
have been a change indeed.  It presented my life in such a new and 
blank form that I rang my housekeeping keys and gave them a kiss 
before I laid them down in their basket again.

Then I went on to think, as I dressed my hair before the glass, how 
often had I considered within myself that the deep traces of my 
illness and the circumstances of my birth were only new reasons why 
I should be busy, busy, busy--useful, amiable, serviceable, in all 
honest, unpretending ways.  This was a good time, to be sure, to 
sit down morbidly and cry!  As to its seeming at all strange to me 
at first (if that were any excuse for crying, which it was not) 
that I was one day to be the mistress of Bleak House, why should it 
seem strange?  Other people had thought of such things, if I had 
not.  "Don't you remember, my plain dear," I asked myself, looking 
at the glass, "what Mrs. Woodcourt said before those scars were 
there about your marrying--"

Perhaps the name brought them to my remembrance.  The dried remains 
of the flowers.  It would be better not to keep them now.  They had 
only been preserved in memory of something wholly past and gone, 
but it would be better not to keep them now.

They were in a book, and it happened to be in the next room--our 
sitting-room, dividing Ada's chamber from mine.  I took a candle 
and went softly in to fetch it from its shelf.  After I had it in 
my hand, I saw my beautiful darling, through the open door, lying 
asleep, and I stole in to kiss her.

It was weak in me, I know, and I could have no reason for crying; 
but I dropped a tear upon her dear face, and another, and another.  
Weaker than that, I took the withered flowers out and put them for 
a moment to her lips.  I thought about her love for Richard, 
though, indeed, the flowers had nothing to do with that.  Then I 
took them into my own room and burned them at the candle, and they 
were dust in an instant.

On entering the breakfast-room next morning, I found my guardian 
just as usual, quite as frank, as open, and free.  There being not 
the least constraint in his manner, there was none (or I think 
there was none) in mine.  I was with him several times in the 
course of the morning, in and out, when there was no one there, and 
I thought it not unlikely that he might speak to me about the 
letter, but he did not say a word.

So, on the next morning, and the next, and for at least a week, 
over which time Mr. Skimpole prolonged his stay.  I expected, every 
day, that my guardian might speak to me about the letter, but he 
never did.

I thought then, growing uneasy, that I ought to write an answer.  I 
tried over and over again in my own room at night, but I could not 
write an answer that at all began like a good answer, so I thought 
each night I would wait one more day.  And I waited seven more 
days, and he never said a word.

At last, Mr. Skimpole having departed, we three were one afternoon 
going out for a ride; and I, being dressed before Ada and going 
down, came upon my guardian, with his back towards me, standing at 
the drawing-room window looking out.

He turned on my coming in and said, smiling, "Aye, it's you, little 
woman, is it?" and looked out again.

I had made up my mind to speak to him now.  In short, I had come 
down on purpose.  "Guardian," I said, rather hesitating and 
trembling, "when would you like to have the answer to the letter 
Charley came for?"

"When it's ready, my dear," he replied.

"I think it is ready," said I.

"Is Charley to bring it?" he asked pleasantly.

"No.  I have brought it myself, guardian," I returned.

I put my two arms round his neck and kissed him, and he said was 
this the mistress of Bleak House, and I said yes; and it made no 
difference presently, and we all went out together, and I said 
nothing to my precious pet about it.



CHAPTER XLV

In Trust


One morning when I had done jingling about with my baskets of keys, 
as my beauty and I were walking round and round the garden I 
happened to turn my eyes towards the house and saw a long thin 
shadow going in which looked like Mr. Vholes.  Ada had been telling 
me only that morning of her hopes that Richard might exhaust his 
ardour in the Chancery suit by being so very earnest in it; and 
therefore, not to damp my dear girl's spirits, I said nothing about 
Mr. Vholes's shadow.

Presently came Charley, lightly winding among the bushes and 
tripping along the paths, as rosy and pretty as one of Flora's 
attendants instead of my maid, saying, "Oh, if you please, miss, 
would you step and speak to Mr. Jarndyce!"

It was one of Charley's peculiarities that whenever she was charged 
with a message she always began to deliver it as soon as she 
beheld, at any distance, the person for whom it was intended.  
Therefore I saw Charley asking me in her usual form of words to 
"step and speak" to Mr. Jarndyce long before I heard her.  And when 
I did hear her, she had said it so often that she was out of 
breath.

I told Ada I would make haste back and inquired of Charley as we 
went in whether there was not a gentleman with Mr. Jarndyce.  To 
which Charley, whose grammar, I confess to my shame, never did any 
credit to my educational powers, replied, "Yes, miss.  Him as come 
down in the country with Mr. Richard."

A more complete contrast than my guardian and Mr. Vholes I suppose 
there could not be.  I found them looking at one another across a 
table, the one so open and the other so close, the one so broad and 
upright and the other so narrow and stooping, the one giving out 
what he had to say in such a rich ringing voice and the other 
keeping it in in such a cold-blooded, gasping, fish-like manner 
that I thought I never had seen two people so unmatched.

"You know Mr. Vholes, my dear," said my guardian.  Not with the 
greatest urbanity, I must say.

Mr. Vholes rose, gloved and buttoned up as usual, and seated 
himself again, just as he had seated himself beside Richard in the 
gig.  Not having Richard to look at, he looked straight before him.

"Mr. Vholes," said my guardian, eyeing his black figure as if he 
were a bird of ill omen, "has brought an ugly report of our most 
unfortunate Rick."  Laying a marked emphasis on "most unfortunate" 
as if the words were rather descriptive of his connexion with Mr. 
Vholes.

I sat down between them; Mr. Vholes remained immovable, except that 
he secretly picked at one of the red pimples on his yellow face 
with his black glove.

"And as Rick and you are happily good friends, I should like to 
know," said my guardian, "what you think, my dear.  Would you be so 
good as to--as to speak up, Mr. Vholes?"

Doing anything but that, Mr. Vholes observed, "I have been saying 
that I have reason to know, Miss Summerson, as Mr. C.'s 
professional adviser, that Mr. C.'s circumstances are at the 
present moment in an embarrassed state.  Not so much in point of 
amount as owing to the peculiar and pressing nature of liabilities 
Mr. C. has incurred and the means he has of liquidating or meeting 
the same.  I have staved off many little matters for Mr. C., but 
there is a limit to staving off, and we have reached it.  I have 
made some advances out of pocket to accommodate these 
unpleasantnesses, but I necessarily look to being repaid, for I do 
not pretend to be a man of capital, and I have a father to support 
in the Vale of Taunton, besides striving to realize some little 
independence for three dear girls at home.  My apprehension is, Mr. 
C.'s circumstances being such, lest it should end in his obtaining 
leave to part with his commission, which at all events is desirable 
to be made known to his connexions."

Mr. Vholes, who had looked at me while speaking, here emerged into 
the silence he could hardly be said to have broken, so stifled was 
his tone, and looked before him again.

"Imagine the poor fellow without even his present resource," said 
my guardian to me.  "Yet what can I do?  You know him, Esther.  He 
would never accept of help from me now.  To offer it or hint at it 
would be to drive him to an extremity, if nothing else did."

Mr. Vholes hereupon addressed me again.

"What Mr. Jarndyce remarks, miss, is no doubt the case, and is the 
difficulty.  I do not see that anything is to be done, I do not say 
that anything is to be done.  Far from it.  I merely come down here 
under the seal of confidence and mention it in order that 
everything may be openly carried on and that it may not be said 
afterwards that everything was not openly carried on.  My wish is 
that everything should be openly carried on.  I desire to leave a 
good name behind me.  If I consulted merely my own interests with 
Mr. C., I should not be here.  So insurmountable, as you must well 
know, would be his objections.  This is not a professional 
attendance.  This can he charged to nobody.  I have no interest in 
it except as a member of society and a father--AND a son," said Mr. 
Vholes, who had nearly forgotten that point.

It appeared to us that Mr. Vholes said neither more nor less than 
the truth in intimating that he sought to divide the 
responsibility, such as it was, of knowing Richard's situation.  I 
could only suggest that I should go down to Deal, where Richard was 
then stationed, and see him, and try if it were possible to avert 
the worst.  Without consulting Mr. Vholes on this point, I took my 
guardian aside to propose it, while Mr. Vholes gauntly stalked to 
the fire and warmed his funeral gloves.

The fatigue of the journey formed an immediate objection on my 
guardian's part, but as I saw he had no other, and as I was only 
too happy to go, I got his consent.  We had then merely to dispose 
of Mr. Vholes.

"Well, sir," said Mr. Jarndyce, "Miss Summerson will communicate 
with Mr. Carstone, and you can only hope that his position may be 
yet retrievable.  You will allow me to order you lunch after your 
journey, sir."

"I thank you, Mr. Jarndyce," said Mr. Vholes, putting out his long 
black sleeve to check the ringing of the bell, "not any.  I thank 
you, no, not a morsel.  My digestion is much impaired, and I am but 
a poor knife and fork at any time.  If I was to partake of solid 
food at this period of the day, I don't know what the consequences 
might be.  Everything having been openly carried on, sir, I will 
now with your permission take my leave."

"And I would that you could take your leave, and we could all take 
our leave, Mr. Vholes," returned my guardian bitterly, "of a cause 
you know of."

Mr. Vholes, whose black dye was so deep from head to foot that it 
had quite steamed before the fire, diffusing a very unpleasant 
perfume, made a short one-sided inclination of his head from the 
neck and slowly shook it.

"We whose ambition it is to be looked upon in the light of 
respectable practitioners, sir, can but put our shoulders to the 
wheel.  We do it, sir.  At least, I do it myself; and I wish to 
think well of my professional brethren, one and all.  You are 
sensible of an obligation not to refer to me, miss, in 
communicating with Mr. C.?"

I said I would be careful not to do it.

"Just so, miss.  Good morning.  Mr. Jarndyce, good morning, sir."  
Mr. Vholes put his dead glove, which scarcely seemed to have any 
hand in it, on my fingers, and then on my guardian's fingers, and 
took his long thin shadow away.  I thought of it on the outside of 
the coach, passing over all the sunny landscape between us and 
London, chilling the seed in the ground as it glided along.

Of course it became necessary to tell Ada where I was going and why 
I was going, and of course she was anxious and distressed.  But she 
was too true to Richard to say anything but words of pity and words 
of excuse, and in a more loving spirit still--my dear devoted 
girl!--she wrote him a long letter, of which I took charge.

Charley was to be my travelling companion, though I am sure I 
wanted none and would willingly have left her at home.  We all went 
to London that afternoon, and finding two places in the mail, 
secured them.  At our usual bed-time, Charley and I were rolling 
away seaward with the Kentish letters.

It was a night's journey in those coach times, but we had the mail 
to ourselves and did not find the night very tedious.  It passed 
with me as I suppose it would with most people under such 
circumstances.  At one while my journey looked hopeful, and at 
another hopeless.  Now I thought I should do some good, and now I 
wondered how I could ever have supposed so.  Now it seemed one of 
the most reasonable things in the world that I should have come, 
and now one of the most unreasonable.  In what state I should find 
Richard, what I should say to him, and what he would say to me 
occupied my mind by turns with these two states of feeling; and the 
wheels seemed to play one tune (to which the burden of my 
guardian's letter set itself) over and over again all night.

At last we came into the narrow streets of Deal, and very gloomy 
they were upon a raw misty morning.  The long flat beach, with its 
little irregular houses, wooden and brick, and its litter of 
capstans, and great boats, and sheds, and bare upright poles with 
tackle and blocks, and loose gravelly waste places overgrown with 
grass and weeds, wore as dull an appearance as any place I ever 
saw.  The sea was heaving under a thick white fog; and nothing else 
was moving but a few early ropemakers, who, with the yarn twisted 
round their bodies, looked as if, tired of their present state of 
existence, they were spinning themselves into cordage.

But when we got into a warm room in an excellent hotel and sat 
down, comfortably washed and dressed, to an early breakfast (for it 
was too late to think of going to bed), Deal began to look more 
cheerful.  Our little room was like a ship's cabin, and that 
delighted Charley very much.  Then the fog began to rise like a 
curtain, and numbers of ships that we had had no idea were near 
appeared.  I don't know how many sail the waiter told us were then 
lying in the downs.  Some of these vessels were of grand size--one 
was a large Indiaman just come home; and when the sun shone through 
the clouds, maktng silvery pools in the dark sea, the way in which 
these ships brightened, and shadowed, and changed, amid a bustle of 
boats pulling off from the shore to them and from them to the 
shore, and a general life and motion in themselves and everything 
around them, was most beautiful.

The large Indiaman was our great attraction because she had come 
into the downs in the night.  She was surrounded by boats, and we 
said how glad the people on board of her must be to come ashore.  
Charley was curious, too, about the voyage, and about the heat in 
India, and the serpents and the tigers; and as she picked up such 
information much faster than grammar, I told her what I knew on 
those points.  I told her, too, how people in such voyages were 
sometimes wrecked and cast on rocks, where they were saved by the 
intrepidity and humanity of one man.  And Charley asking how that 
could be, I told her how we knew at home of such a case.

I had thought of sending Richard a note saying I was there, but it 
seemed so much better to go to him without preparation.  As he 
lived in barracks I was a little doubtful whether this was 
feasible, but we went out to reconnoitre.  Peeping in at the gate 
of the barrack-yard, we found everything very quiet at that time in 
the morning, and I asked a sergeant standing on the guardhouse-
steps where he lived.  He sent a man before to show me, who went up 
some bare stairs, and knocked with his knuckles at a door, and left 
us.

"Now then!" cried Richard from within.  So I left Charley in the 
little passage, and going on to the half-open door, said, "Can I 
come in, Richard?  It's only Dame Durden."

He was writing at a table, with a great confusion of clothes, tin 
cases, books, boots, brushes, and portmanteaus strewn all about the 
floor.  He was only half dressed--in plain clothes, I observed, not 
in uniform--and his hair was unbrushed, and he looked as wild as 
his room.  All this I saw after he had heartily welcomed me and I 
was seated near him, for he started upon hearing my voice and 
caught me in his arms in a moment.  Dear Richard!  He was ever the 
same to me.  Down to--ah, poor poor fellow!--to the end, he never 
received me but with something of his old merry boyish manner.

"Good heaven, my dear little woman," said he, "how do you come 
here?  Who could have thought of seeing you!  Nothing the matter?  
Ada is well?"

"Quite well.  Lovelier than ever, Richard!"

"Ah!" he said, lenning back in his chair.  "My poor cousin!  I was 
writing to you, Esther."

So worn and haggard as he looked, even in the fullness of his 
handsome youth, leaning back in his chair and crushing the closely 
written sheet of paper in his hand!

"Have you been at the trouble of writing all that, and am I not to 
read it after all?" I asked.

"Oh, my dear," he returned with a hopeless gesture.  "You may read 
it in the whole room.  It is all over here."

I mildly entreated him not to be despondent.  I told him that I had 
heard by chance of his being in difficulty and had come to consult 
with him what could best be done.

"Like you, Esther, but useless, and so NOT like you!" said he with 
a melancholy smile.  "I am away on leave this day--should have been 
gone in another hour--and that is to smooth it over, for my selling 
out.  Well! Let bygones be bygones.  So this calling follows the 
rest.  I only want to have been in the church to have made the 
round of all the professions."

"Richard," I urged, "it is not so hopeless as that?"

"Esther," he returned, "it is indeed.  I am just so near disgrace 
as that those who are put in authority over me (as the catechism 
goes) would far rather be without me than with me.  And they are 
right.  Apart from debts and duns and all such drawbacks, I am not 
fit even for this employment.  I have no care, no mind, no heart, 
no soul, but for one thing.  Why, if this bubble hadn't broken 
now," he said, tearing the letter he had written into fragments and 
moodily casting them away, by driblets, "how could I have gone 
abroad?  I must have been ordered abroad, but how could I have 
gone?  How could I, with my experience of that thing, trust even 
Vholes unless I was at his back!"

I suppose he knew by my face what I was about to say, but he caught 
the hand I had laid upon his arm and touched my own lips with it to 
prevent me from going on.

"No, Dame Durden!  Two subjects I forbid--must forbid.  The first 
is John Jarndyce.  The second, you know what.  Call it madness, and 
I tell you I can't help it now, and can't be sane.  But it is no 
such thing; it is the one object I have to pursue.  It is a pity I 
ever was prevailed upon to turn out of my road for any other.  It 
would be wisdom to abandon it now, after all the time, anxiety, and 
pains I have bestowed upon it!  Oh, yes, true wisdom.  It would be 
very agreeable, too, to some people; but I never will."

He was in that mood in which I thought it best not to increase his 
determination (if anything could increase it) by opposing him.  I 
took out Ada's letter and put it in his hand.

"Am I to read it now?" he asked.

As I told him yes, he laid it on the table, and resting his head 
upon his hand, began.  He had not read far when he rested his head 
upon his two hands--to hide his face from me.  In a little while he 
rose as if the light were bad and went to the window.  He finished 
reading it there, with his back towards me, and after he had 
finished and had folded it up, stood there for some minutes with 
the letter in his hand.  When he came back to his chair, I saw 
tears in his eyes.

"Of course, Esther, you know what she says here?"  He spoke in a 
softened voice and kissed the letter as he asked me.

"Yes, Richard."

"Offers me," he went on, tapping his foot upon the floor, "the 
little inheritance she is certain of so soon--just as little and as 
much as I have wasted--and begs and prays me to take it, set myself 
right with it, and remain in the service."

"I know your welfare to be the dearest wish of her heart," said I.  
"And, oh, my dear Richard, Ada's is a noble heart."

"I am sure it is.  I--I wish I was dead!"

He went back to the window, and laying his arm across it, leaned 
his head down on his arm.  It greatly affected me to see him so, 
but I hoped he might become more yielding, and I remained silent.  
My experience was very limited; I was not at all prepared for his 
rousing himself out of this emotion to a new sense of injury.

"And this is the heart that the same John Jarndyce, who is not 
otherwise to be mentioned between us, stepped in to estrange from 
me," said he indignantly.  "And the dear girl makes me this 
generous offer from under the same John Jarndyce's roof, and with 
the same John Jarndyce's gracious consent and connivance, I dare 
say, as a new means of buying me off."

"Richard!" I cried out, rising hastily.  "I will not hear you say 
such shameful words!"  I was very angry with him indeed, for the 
first time in my life, but it only lasted a moment.  When I saw his 
worn young face looking at me as if he were sorry, I put my hand on 
his shoulder and said, "If you please, my dear Richard, do not 
speak in such a tone to me.  Consider!"

He blamed himself exceedingly and told me in the most generous 
manner that he had been very wrong and that he begged my pardon a 
thousand times.  At that I laughed, but trembled a little too, for 
I was rather fluttered after being so fiery.

"To accept this offer, my dear Esther," said he, sitting down 
beside me and resuming our conversation, "--once more, pray, pray 
forgive me; I am deeply grieved--to accept my dearest cousin's 
offer is, I need not say, impossible.  Besides, I have letters and 
papers that I could show you which would convince you it is all 
over here.  I have done with the red coat, believe me.  But it is 
some satisfaction, in the midst of my troubles and perplexities, to 
know that I am pressing Ada's interests in pressing my own.  Vholes 
has his shoulder to the wheel, and he cannot help urging it on as 
much for her as for me, thank God!"

His sanguine hopes were rising within him and lighting up his 
features, but they made his face more sad to me than it had been 
before.

"No, no!" cried Richard exultingly.  "If every farthing of Ada's 
little fortune were mine, no part of it should be spent in 
retaining me in what I am not fit for, can take no interest in, and 
am weary of.  It should be devoted to what promises a better 
return, and should be used where she has a larger stake.  Don't be 
uneasy for me!  I shall now have only one thing on my mind, and 
Vholes and I will work it.  I shall not be without means.  Free of 
my commission, I shall be able to compound with some small usurers 
who will hear of nothing but their bond now--Vholes says so.  I 
should have a balance in my favour anyway, but that would swell it.  
Come, come!  You shall carry a letter to Ada from me, Esther, and 
you must both of you be more hopeful of me and not believe that I 
am quite cast away just yet, my dear."

I will not repeat what I said to Richard.  I know it was tiresome, 
and nobody is to suppose for a moment that it was at all wise.  It 
only came from my heart.  He heard it patiently and feelingly, but 
I saw that on the two subjects he had reserved it was at present 
hopeless to make any representation to him.  I saw too, and had 
experienced in this very interview, the sense of my guardian's 
remark that it was even more mischievous to use persuasion with him 
than to leave him as he was.

Therefore I was driven at last to asking Richard if he would mind 
convincing me that it really was all over there, as he had said, 
and that it was not his mere impression.  He showed me without 
hesitation a correspondence making it quite plain that his 
retirement was arranged.  I found, from what he told me, that Mr. 
Vholes had copies of these papers and had been in consultation with 
him throughout.  Beyond ascertaining this, and having been the 
bearer of Ada's letter, and being (as I was going to be) Richard's 
companion back to London, I had done no good by coming down.  
Admitting this to myself with a reluctant heart, I said I would 
return to the hotel and wait until he joined me there, so he threw 
a cloak over his shoulders and saw me to the gate, and Charley and 
I went back along the beach.

There was a concourse of people in one spot, surrounding some naval 
officers who were landing from a boat, and pressing about them with 
unusual interest.  I said to Charley this would be one of the great 
Indiaman's boats now, and we stopped to look.

The gentlemen came slowly up from the waterside, speaking good-
humouredly to each other and to the people around and glancing 
about them as if they were glad to be in England again.  "Charley, 
Charley," said I, "come away!"  And I hurried on so swiftly that my 
little maid was surprised.

It was not until we were shut up in our cabin-room and I had had 
time to take breath that I began to think why I had made such 
haste.  In one of the sunburnt faces I had recognized Mr. Allan 
Woodcourt, and I had been afraid of his recognizing me.  I had been 
unwilling that he should see my altered looks.  I had been taken by 
surprise, and my courage had quite failed me.

But I knew this would not do, and I now said to myself, "My dear, 
there is no reason--there is and there can be no reason at all--why 
it should be worse for you now than it ever has been.  What you 
were last month, you are to-day; you are no worse, you are no 
better.  This is not your resolution; call it up, Esther, call it 
up!"  I was in a great tremble--with running--and at first was 
quite unable to calm myself; but I got better, and I was very glad 
to know it.

The party came to the hotel.  I heard them speaking on the 
staircase.  I was sure it was the same gentlemen because I knew 
their voices again--I mean I knew Mr. Woodcourt's.  It would still 
have been a great relief to me to have gone away without making 
myself known, but I was determined not to do so.  "No, my dear, no.  
No, no, no!"

I untied my bonnet and put my veil half up--I think I mean half 
down, but it matters very little--and wrote on one of my cards that 
I happened to be there with Mr. Richard Carstone, and I sent it in 
to Mr. Woodcourt.  He came immediately.  I told him I was rejoiced 
to be by chance among the first to welcome him home to England.  
And I saw that he was very sorry for me.

"You have been in shipwreck and peril since you left us, Mr. 
Woodcourt," said I, "but we can hardly call that a misfortune which 
enabled you to be so useful and so brave.  We read of it with the 
truest interest.  It first came to my knowledge through your old 
patient, poor Miss Flite, when I was recovering from my severe 
illness."

"Ah! Little Miss Flite!" he said.  "She lives the same life yet?"

"Just the same."

I was so comfortable with myself now as not to mind the veil and to 
be able to put it aside.

"Her gratitude to you, Mr. Woodcourt, is delightful.  She is a most 
affectionate creature, as I have reason to say."

"You--you have found her so?" he returned.  "I--I am glad of that."  
He was so very sorry for me that he could scarcely speak.

"I assure you," said I, "that I was deeply touched by her sympathy 
and pleasure at the time I have referred to."

"I was grieved to hear that you had been very ill."

"I was very ill."

"But you have quite recovered?"

"I have quite recovered my health and my cheerfulness," said I.  
"You know how good my guardian is and what a happy life we lead, 
and I have everything to be thankful for and nothing in the world 
to desire."

I felt as if he had greater commiseration for me than I had ever 
had for myself.  It inspired me with new fortitude and new calmness 
to find that it was I who was under the necessity of reassuring 
him.  I spoke to him of his voyage out and home, and of his future 
plans, and of his probable return to India.  He said that was very 
doubtful.  He had not found himself more favoured by fortune there 
than here.  He had gone out a poor ship's surgeon and had come home 
nothing better.  While we were talking, and when I was glad to 
believe that I had alleviated (if I may use such a term) the shock 
he had had in seeing me, Richard came in.  He had heard downstairs 
who was with me, and they met with cordial pleasure.

I saw that after their first greetings were over, and when they 
spoke of Richard's career, Mr. Woodcourt had a perception that all 
was not going well with him.  He frequently glanced at his face as 
if there were something in it that gave him pain, and more than 
once he looked towards me as though he sought to ascertain whether 
I knew what the truth was.  Yet Richard was in one of his sanguine 
states and in good spirits and was thoroughly pleased to see Mr. 
Woodcourt again, whom he had always liked.

Richard proposed that we all should go to London together; but Mr. 
Woodcourt, having to remain by his ship a little longer, could not 
join us.  He dined with us, however, at an early hour, and became 
so much more like what he used to be that I was still more at peace 
to think I had been able to soften his regrets.  Yet his mind was 
not relieved of Richard.  When the coach was almost ready and 
Richard ran down to look after his luggage, he spoke to me about 
him.

I was not sure that I had a right to lay his whole story open, but 
I referred in a few words to his estrangement from Mr Jarndyce and 
to his being entangled in the ill-fated Chancery suit.  Mr. 
Woodcourt listened with interest and expressed his regret.

"I saw you observe him rather closely," said I, "Do you think him 
so changed?"

"He is changed," he returned, shaking his head.

I felt the blood rush into my face for the first time, but it was 
only an instantaneous emotion.  I turned my head aside, and it was 
gone.

"It is not," said Mr. Woodcourt, "his being so much younger or 
older, or thinner or fatter, or paler or ruddier, as there being 
upon his face such a singular expression.  I never saw so 
remarkable a look in a young person.  One cannot say that it is all 
anxiety or all weariness; yet it is both, and like ungrown 
despair."

"You do not think he is ill?" said I.

No.  He looked robust in body.

"That he cannot be at peace in mind, we have too much reason to 
know," I proceeded.  "Mr. Woodcourt, you are going to London?"

"To-morrow or the next day."

"There is nothing Richard wants so much as a friend.  He always 
liked you.  Pray see him when you get there.  Pray help him 
sometimes with your companionship if you can.  You do not know of 
what service it might be.  You cannot think how Ada, and Mr. 
Jarndyce, and even I--how we should all thank you, Mr. Woodcourt!"

"Miss Summerson," he said, more moved than he had been from the 
first, "before heaven, I will be a true friend to him!  I will 
accept him as a trust, and it shall be a sacred one!"

"God bless you!" said I, with my eyes filling fast; but I thought 
they might, when it was not for myself.  "Ada loves him--we all 
love him, but Ada loves him as we cannot.  I will tell her what you 
say.  Thank you, and God bless you, in her name!"

Richard came back as we finished exchanging these hurried words and 
gave me his arm to take me to the coach.

"Woodcourt," he said, unconscious with what application, "pray let 
us meet in London!"

"Meet?" returned the other.  "I have scarcely a friend there now 
but you.  Where shall I find you?"

"Why, I must get a lodging of some sort," said Richard, pondering.  
"Say at Vholes's, Symond's Inn."

"Good!  Without loss of time."

They shook hands heartily.  When I was seated in the coach and 
Richard was yet standing in the street, Mr. Woodcourt laid his 
friendly hand on Richard's shoulder and looked at me.  I understood 
him and waved mine in thanks.

And in his last look as we drove away, I saw that he was very sorry 
for me.  I was glad to see it.  I felt for my old self as the dead 
may feel if they ever revisit these scenes.  I was glad to be 
tenderly remembered, to be gently pitied, not to be quite 
forgotten.



CHAPTER XLVI

Stop Him!


Darkness rests upon Tom-All-Alone's.  Dilating and dilating since 
the sun went down last night, it has gradually swelled until it 
fills every void in the place.  For a time there were some dungeon 
lights burning, as the lamp of life hums in Tom-all-Alone's, 
heavily, heavily, in the nauseous air, and winking--as that lamp, 
too, winks in Tom-all-Alone's--at many horrible things.  But they 
are blotted out.  The moon has eyed Tom with a dull cold stare, as 
admitting some puny emulation of herself in his desert region unfit 
for life and blasted by volcanic fires; but she has passed on and 
is gone.  The blackest nightmare in the infernal stables grazes on 
Tom-all-Alone's, and Tom is fast asleep.

Much mighty speech-making there has been, both in and out of 
Parliament, concerning Tom, and much wrathful disputation how Tom 
shall be got right.  Whether he shall be put into the main road by 
constables, or by beadles, or by bell-ringing, or by force of 
figures, or by correct principles of taste, or by high church, or 
by low church, or by no church; whether he shall be set to 
splitting trusses of polemical straws with the crooked knife of his 
mind or whether he shall be put to stone-breaking instead.  In the 
midst of which dust and noise there is but one thing perfectly 
clear, to wit, that Tom only may and can, or shall and will, be 
reclaimed according to somebody's theory but nobody's practice.  
And in the hopeful meantime, Tom goes to perdition head foremost in 
his old determined spirit.

But he has his revenge.  Even the winds are his messengers, and 
they serve him in these hours of darkness.  There is not a drop of 
Tom's corrupted blood but propagates infection and contagion 
somewhere.  It shall pollute, this very night, the choice stream 
(in which chemists on analysis would find the genuine nobility) of 
a Norman house, and his Grace shall not be able to say nay to the 
infamous alliance.  There is not an atom of Tom's slime, not a 
cubic inch of any pestilential gas in which he lives, not one 
obscenity or degradation about him, not an ignorance, not a 
wickedness, not a brutality of his committing, but shall work its 
retribution through every order of society up to the proudest of 
the proud and to the highest of the high.  Verily, what with 
tainting, plundering, and spoiling, Tom has his revenge.

It is a moot point whether Tom-all-Alone's be uglier by day or by 
night, but on the argument that the more that is seen of it the 
more shocking it must be, and that no part of it left to the 
imagination is at all likely to be made so bad as the reality, day 
carries it.  The day begins to break now; and in truth it might be 
better for the national glory even that the sun should sometimes 
set upon the British dominions than that it should ever rise upon 
so vile a wonder as Tom.

A brown sunburnt gentleman, who appears in some inaptitude for 
sleep to be wandering abroad rather than counting the hours on a 
restless pillow, strolls hitherward at this quiet time.  Attracted 
by curiosity, he often pauses and looks about him, up and down the 
miserable by-ways.  Nor is he merely curious, for in his bright 
dark eye there is compassionate interest; and as he looks here and 
there, he seems to understand such wretchedness and to have studied 
it before.

On the banks of the stagnant channel of mud which is the main 
street of Tom-all-Alone's, nothing is to be seen but the crazy 
houses, shut up and silent.  No waking creature save himself 
appears except in one direction, where he sees the solitary figure 
of a woman sitting on a door-step.  He walks that way.  
Approaching, he observes that she has journeyed a long distance and 
is footsore and travel-stained.  She sits on the door-step in the 
manner of one who is waiting, with her elbow on her knee and her 
head upon her hand.  Beside her is a canvas bag, or bundle, she has 
carried.  She is dozing probably, for she gives no heed to his 
steps as he comes toward her.

The broken footway is so narrow that when Allan Woodcourt comes to 
where the woman sits, he has to turn into the road to pass her.  
Looking down at her face, his eye meets hers, and he stops.

"What is the matter?"

"Nothing, sir."

"Can't you make them hear?  Do you want to be let in?"

"I'm walting till they get up at another house--a lodging-house--
not here," the woman patiently returns.  "I'm waiting here because 
there will be sun here presently to warm me."

"I am afraid you are tired.  I am sorry to see you sitting in the 
street."

"Thank you, sir.  It don't matter."

A habit in him of speaking to the poor and of avoiding patronage or 
condescension or childishness (which is the favourite device, many 
people deeming it quite a subtlety to talk to them like little 
spelling books) has put him on good terms with the woman easily.

"Let me look at your forehead," he says, bending down.  "I am a 
doctor.  Don't be afraid.  I wouldn't hurt you for the world."

He knows that by touching her with his skilful and accustomed hand 
he can soothe her yet more readily.  She makes a slight objection, 
saying, "It's nothing"; but he has scarcely laid his fingers on the 
wounded place when she lifts it up to the light.

"Aye! A bad bruise, and the skin sadly broken.  This must be very 
sore."

"It do ache a little, sir," returns the woman with a started tear 
upon her cheek.

"Let me try to make it more comfortable.  My handkerchief won't 
hurt you."

"Oh, dear no, sir, I'm sure of that!"

He cleanses the injured place and dries it, and having carefully 
examined it and gently pressed it with the palm of his hand, takes 
a small case from his pocket, dresses it, and binds it up.  While 
he is thus employed, he says, after laughing at his establishing a 
surgery in the street, "And so your husband is a brickmaker?"

"How do you know that, sir?" asks the woman, astonished.

"Why, I suppose so from the colour of the clay upon your bag and on 
your dress.  And I know brickmakers go about working at piecework 
in different places.  And I am sorry to say I have known them cruel 
to their wives too."

The woman hastily lifts up her eyes as if she would deny that her 
injury is referable to such a cause.  But feeling the hand upon her 
forehead, and seeing his busy and composed face, she quietly drops 
them again.

"Where is he now?" asks the surgeon.

"He got into trouble last night, sir; but he'll look for me at the 
lodging-house."

"He will get into worse trouble if he often misuses his large and 
heavy hand as he has misused it here.  But you forgive him, brutal 
as he is, and I say no more of him, except that I wish he deserved 
it.  You have no young child?"

The woman shakes her head.  "One as I calls mine, sir, but it's 
Liz's."

"Your own is dead.  I see!  Poor little thing!"

By this time he has finished and is putting up his case.  "I 
suppose you have some settled home.  Is it far from here?" he asks, 
good-humouredly making light of what he has done as she gets up and 
curtsys.

"It's a good two or three and twenty mile from here, sir.  At Saint 
Albans.  You know Saint Albans, sir?  I thought you gave a start 
like, as if you did."

"Yes, I know something of it.  And now I will ask you a question in 
return.  Have you money for your lodging?"

"Yes, sir," she says, "really and truly."  And she shows it.  He 
tells her, in acknowledgment of her many subdued thanks, that she 
is very welcome, gives her good day, and walks away.  Tom-all-
Alone's is still asleep, and nothing is astir.

Yes, something is!  As he retraces his way to the point from which 
he descried the woman at a distance sitting on the step, he sees a 
ragged figure coming very cautiously along, crouching close to the 
soiled walls--which the wretchedest figure might as well avoid--and 
furtively thrusting a hand before it.  It is the figure of a youth 
whose face is hollow and whose eyes have an emaciated glare.  He is 
so intent on getting along unseen that even the apparition of a 
stranger in whole garments does not tempt him to look back.  He 
shades his face with his ragged elbow as he passes on the other 
side of the way, and goes shrinking and creeping on with his 
anxious hand before him and his shapeless clothes hanging in 
shreds.  Clothes made for what purpose, or of what material, it 
would be impossible to say.  They look, in colour and in substance, 
like a bundle of rank leaves of swampy growth that rotted long ago.

Allan Woodcourt pauses to look after him and note all this, with a 
shadowy belief that he has seen the boy before.  He cannot recall 
how or where, but there is some association in his mind with such a 
form.  He imagines that he must have seen it in some hospital or 
refuge, still, cannot make out why it comes with any special force 
on his remembrance.

He is gradually emerging from Tom-all-Alone's in the morning light, 
thinking about it, when he hears running feet behind him, and 
looking round, sees the boy scouring towards him at great speed, 
followed by the woman.

"Stop him, stop him!" cries the woman, almost breath less.  "Stop 
him, sir!"

He darts across the road into the boy's path, but the boy is 
quicker than he, makes a curve, ducks, dives under his hands, comes 
up half-a-dozen yards beyond him, and scours away again.  Still the 
woman follows, crying, "Stop him, sir, pray stop him!"  Allan, not 
knowing but that he has just robbed her of her money, follows in 
chase and runs so hard that he runs the boy down a dozen times, but 
each time he repeats the curve, the duck, the dive, and scours away 
again.  To strike at him on any of these occasions would be to fell 
and disable him, but the pursuer cannot resolve to do that, and so 
the grimly ridiculous pursuit continues.  At last the fugitive, 
hard-pressed, takes to a narrow passage and a court which has no 
thoroughfare.  Here, against a hoarding of decaying timber, he is 
brought to bay and tumbles down, lying gasping at his pursuer, who 
stands and gasps at him until the woman comes up.

"Oh, you, Jo!" cries the woman.  "What?  I have found you at last!"

"Jo," repeats Allan, looking at him with attention, "Jo!  Stay.  To 
be sure!  I recollect this lad some time ago being brought before 
the coroner."

"Yes, I see you once afore at the inkwhich," whimpers Jo.  "What of 
that?  Can't you never let such an unfortnet as me alone?  An't I 
unfortnet enough for you yet?  How unfortnet do you want me fur to 
be?  I've been a-chivied and a-chivied, fust by one on you and nixt 
by another on you, till I'm worritted to skins and bones.  The 
inkwhich warn't MY fault.  I done nothink.  He wos wery good to me, 
he wos; he wos the only one I knowed to speak to, as ever come 
across my crossing.  It ain't wery likely I should want him to be 
inkwhiched.  I only wish I wos, myself.  I don't know why I don't 
go and make a hole in the water, I'm sure I don't."

He says it with such a pitiable air, and his grimy tears appear so 
real, and he lies in the corner up against the hoarding so like a 
growth of fungus or any unwholesome excrescence produced there in 
neglect and impurity, that Allan Woodcourt is softened towards him.  
He says to the woman, "Miserable creature, what has he done?"

To which she only replies, shaking her head at the prostrate figure 
more amazedly than angrily, "Oh, you Jo, you Jo.  I have found you 
at last!"

"What has he done?" says Allan.  "Has he robbed you?"

"No, sir, no.  Robbed me?  He did nothing but what was kind-hearted 
by me, and that's the wonder of it."

Allan looks from Jo to the woman, and from the woman to Jo, waiting 
for one of them to unravel the riddle.

"But he was along with me, sir," says the woman.  "Oh, you Jo!  He 
was along with me, sir, down at Saint Albans, ill, and a young 
lady, Lord bless her for a good friend to me, took pity on him when 
I durstn't, and took him home--"

Allan shrinks back from him with a sudden horror.

"Yes, sir, yes.  Took him home, and made him comfortable, and like 
a thankless monster he ran away in the night and never has been 
seen or heard of since till I set eyes on him just now.  And that 
young lady that was such a pretty dear caught his illness, lost her 
beautiful looks, and wouldn't hardly be known for the same young 
lady now if it wasn't for her angel temper, and her pretty shape, 
and her sweet voice.  Do you know it?  You ungrateful wretch, do 
you know that this is all along of you and of her goodness to you?" 
demands the woman, beginning to rage at him as she recalls it and 
breaking into passionate tears.

The boy, in rough sort stunned by what he hears, falls to smearing 
his dirty forehead with his dirty palm, and to staring at the 
ground, and to shaking from head to foot until the crazy hoarding 
against which he leans rattles.

Allan restrains the woman, merely by a quiet gesture, but 
effectually.

"Richard told me--"  He falters.  "I mean, I have heard of this--
don't mind me for a moment, I will speak presently."

He turns away and stands for a while looking out at the covered 
passage.  When he comes back, he has recovered his composure, 
except that he contends against an avoidance of the boy, which is 
so very remarkable that it absorbs the woman's attention.

"You hear what she says.  But get up, get up!"

Jo, shaking and chattering, slowly rises and stands, after the 
manner of his tribe in a difficulty, sideways against the hoarding, 
resting one of his high shoulders against it and covertly rubbing 
his right hand over his left and his left foot over his right.

"You hear what she says, and I know it's true.  Have you been here 
ever since?"

"Wishermaydie if I seen Tom-all-Alone's till this blessed morning," 
replies Jo hoarsely.

"Why have you come here now?"

Jo looks all round the confined court, looks at his questioner no 
higher than the knees, and finally answers, "I don't know how to do 
nothink, and I can't get nothink to do.  I'm wery poor and ill, and 
I thought I'd come back here when there warn't nobody about, and 
lay down and hide somewheres as I knows on till arter dark, and 
then go and beg a trifle of Mr. Snagsby.  He wos allus willin fur 
to give me somethink he wos, though Mrs. Snagsby she was allus a-
chivying on me--like everybody everywheres."

"Where have you come from?"

Jo looks all round the court again, looks at his questioner's knees 
again, and concludes by laying his profile against the hoarding in 
a sort of resignation.

"Did you hear me ask you where you have come from?"

"Tramp then," says Jo.

"Now tell me," proceeds Allan, making a strong effort to overcome 
his repugnance, going very near to him, and leaning over him with 
an expression of confidence, "tell me how it came about that you 
left that house when the good young lady had been so unfortunate as 
to pity you and take you home."

Jo suddenly comes out of his resignation and excitedly declares, 
addressing the woman, that he never known about the young lady, 
that he never heern about it, that he never went fur to hurt her, 
that he would sooner have hurt his own self, that he'd sooner have 
had his unfortnet ed chopped off than ever gone a-nigh her, and 
that she wos wery good to him, she wos.  Conducting himself 
throughout as if in his poor fashion he really meant it, and 
winding up with some very miserable sobs.

Allan Woodcourt sees that this is not a sham.  He constrains 
himself to touch him.  "Come, Jo.  Tell me."

"No.  I dustn't," says Jo, relapsing into the profile state.  "I 
dustn't, or I would."

"But I must know," returns the other, "all the same.  Come, Jo."

After two or three such adjurations, Jo lifts up his head again, 
looks round the court again, and says in a low voice, "Well, I'll 
tell you something.  I was took away.  There!"

"Took away?  In the night?"

"Ah!"  Very apprehensive of being overheard, Jo looks about him and 
even glances up some ten feet at the top of the hoarding and 
through the cracks in it lest the object of his distrust should be 
looking over or hidden on the other side.

"Who took you away?"

"I dustn't name him," says Jo.  "I dustn't do it, sir.

"But I want, in the young lady's name, to know.  You may trust me.  
No one else shall hear."

"Ah, but I don't know," replies Jo, shaking his head fearfulty, "as 
he DON'T hear."

"Why, he is not in this place."

"Oh, ain't he though?" says Jo.  "He's in all manner of places, all 
at wanst."

Allan looks at him in perplexity, but discovers some real meaning 
and good faith at the bottom of this bewildering reply.  He 
patiently awaits an explicit answer; and Jo, more baffled by his 
patience than by anything else, at last desperately whispers a name 
in his ear.

"Aye!" says Allan.  "Why, what had you been doing?"

"Nothink, sir.  Never done nothink to get myself into no trouble, 
'sept in not moving on and the inkwhich.  But I'm a-moving on now.  
I'm a-moving on to the berryin ground--that's the move as I'm up 
to."

"No, no, we will try to prevent that.  But what did he do with 
you?"

"Put me in a horsepittle," replied Jo, whispering, "till I was 
discharged, then giv me a little money--four half-bulls, wot you 
may call half-crowns--and ses 'Hook it!  Nobody wants you here,' he 
ses.  'You hook it.  You go and tramp,' he ses.  'You move on,' he 
ses.  'Don't let me ever see you nowheres within forty mile of 
London, or you'll repent it.'  So I shall, if ever he doos see me, 
and he'll see me if I'm above ground," concludes Jo, nervously 
repeating all his former precautions and investigations.

Allan considers a little, then remarks, turning to the woman but 
keeping an encouraging eye on Jo, "He is not so ungrateful as you 
supposed.  He had a reason for going away, though it was an 
insufficient one."

"Thankee, sir, thankee!" exclaims Jo.  "There now!  See how hard 
you wos upon me.  But ony you tell the young lady wot the genlmn 
ses, and it's all right.  For YOU wos wery good to me too, and I 
knows it."

"Now, Jo," says Allan, keeping his eye upon him, "come with me and 
I will find you a better place than this to lie down and hide in.  
If I take one side of the way and you the other to avoid 
observation, you will not run away, I know very well, if you make 
me a promise."

"I won't, not unless I wos to see HIM a-coming, sir."

"Very well.  I take your word.  Half the town is getting up by this 
time, and the whole town will be broad awake in another hour.  Come 
along.  Good day again, my good woman."

"Good day again, sir, and I thank you kindly many times again."

She has been sitting on her bag, deeply attentive, and now rises 
and takes it up.  Jo, repeating, "Ony you tell the young lady as I 
never went fur to hurt her and wot the genlmn ses!" nods and 
shambles and shivers, and smears and blinks, and half laughs and 
half cries, a farewell to her, and takes his creeping way along 
after Allan Woodcourt, close to the houses on the opposite side of 
the street.  In this order, the two come up out of Tom-all-Alone's 
into the broad rays of the sunlight and the purer air.



CHAPTER XLVII

Jo's Will


As Allan Woodcourt and Jo proceed along the streets where the high 
church spires and the distances are so near and clear in the 
morning light that the city itself seems renewed by rest, Allan 
revolves in his mind how and where he shall bestow his companion.  
"It surely is a strange fact," he considers, "that in the heart of 
a civilized world this creature in human form should be more 
difficult to dispose of than an unowned dog."  But it is none the 
less a fact because of its strangeness, and the difficulty remains.

At first he looks behind him often to assure himself that Jo is 
still really following.  But look where he will, he still beholds 
him close to the opposite houses, making his way with his wary hand 
from brick to brick and from door to door, and often, as he creeps 
along, glancing over at him watchfully.  Soon satisfied that the 
last thing in his thoughts is to give him the slip, Allan goes on, 
considering with a less divided attention what he shall do.

A breakfast-stall at a street-corner suggests the first thing to be 
done.  He stops there, looks round, and beckons Jo.  Jo crosses and 
comes halting and shuffling up, slowly scooping the knuckles of his 
right hand round and round in the hollowed palm of his left, 
kneading dirt with a natural pestle and mortar.  What is a dainty 
repast to Jo is then set before him, and he begins to gulp the 
coffee and to gnaw the bread and butter, looking anxiously about 
him in all directions as he eats and drinks, like a scared animal.

But he is so sick and miserable that even hunger has abandoned him.  
"I thought I was amost a-starvin, sir," says Jo, soon putting down 
his food, "but I don't know nothink--not even that.  I don't care 
for eating wittles nor yet for drinking on 'em."  And Jo stands 
shivering and looking at the breakfast wonderingly.

Allan Woodcourt lays his hand upon his pulse and on his chest.  
"Draw breath, Jo!"  "It draws," says Jo, "as heavy as a cart."  He 
might add, "And rattles like it," but he only mutters, "I'm a-
moving on, sir."

Allan looks about for an apothecary's shop.  There is none at hand, 
but a tavern does as well or better.  He obtains a little measure 
of wine and gives the lad a portion of it very carefully.  He 
begins to revive almost as soon as it passes his lips.  "We may 
repeat that dose, Jo," observes Allan after watching him with his 
attentive face.  "So!  Now we will take five minutes' rest, and 
then go on again."

Leaving the boy sitting on the bench of the breakfast-stall, with 
his back against an iron railing, Allan Woodcourt paces up and down 
in the early sunshine, casting an occasional look towards him 
without appearing to watch him.  It requires no discernment to 
perceive that he is warmed and refreshed.  If a face so shaded can 
brighten, his face brightens somewhat; and by little and little he 
eats the slice of bread he had so hopelessly laid down.  Observant 
of these signs of improvement, Allan engages him in conversation 
and elicits to his no small wonder the adventure of the lady in the 
veil, with all its consequences.  Jo slowly munches as he slowly 
tells it.  When he has finished his story and his bread, they go on 
again.

Intending to refer his difficulty in finding a temporary place of 
refuge for the boy to his old patient, zealous little Miss Flite, 
Allan leads the way to the court where he and Jo first 
foregathered.  But all is changed at the rag and bottle shop; Miss 
Flite no longer lodges there; it is shut up; and a hard-featured 
female, much obscured by dust, whose age is a problem, but who is 
indeed no other than the interesting Judy, is tart and spare in her 
replies.  These sufficing, however, to inform the visitor that Miss 
Flite and her birds are domiciled with a Mrs. Blinder, in Bell 
Yard, he repairs to that neighbouring place, where Miss Flite (who 
rises early that she may be punctual at the divan of justice held 
by her excellent friend the Chancellor) comes running downstairs 
with tears of welcome and with open arms.

"My dear physician!" cries Miss Flite.  "My meritorious, 
distinguished, honourable officer!"  She uses some odd expressions, 
but is as cordial and full of heart as sanity itself can be--more 
so than it often is.  Allan, very patient with her, waits until she 
has no more raptures to express, then points out Jo, trembling in a 
doorway, and tells her how he comes there.

"Where can I lodge him hereabouts for the present?  Now, you have a 
fund of knowledge and good sense and can advise me.

Miss Flite, mighty proud of the compliment, sets herself to 
consider; but it is long before a bright thought occurs to her.  
Mrs. Blinder is entirely let, and she herself occupies poor 
Gridley's room.  "Gridley!" exclaims Miss Flite, clapping her hands 
after a twentieth repetition of this remark.  "Gridley!  To be 
sure!  Of course!  My dear physician!  General George will help us 
out."

It is hopeless to ask for any information about General George, and 
would be, though Miss Flite had not akeady run upstairs to put on 
her pinched bonnet and her poor little shawl and to arm herself 
with her reticule of documents.  But as she informs her physician 
in her disjointed manner on coming down in full array that General 
George, whom she often calls upon, knows her dear Fitz Jarndyce and 
takes a great interest in all connected with her, Allan is induced 
to think that they may be in the right way.  So he tells Jo, for 
his encouragement, that this walking about will soon be over now; 
and they repair to the general's.  Fortunately it is not far.

From the exterior of George's Shooting Gallery, and the long entry, 
and the bare perspective beyond it, Allan Woodcourt augurs well.  
He also descries promise in the figure of Mr. George himself, 
striding towards them in his mornmg exercise with his pipe in his 
mouth, no stock on, and his muscular arms, developed by broadsword 
and dumbbell, weightily asserting themselves through his light 
shirt-sleeves.

"Your servant, sir," says Mr. George with a military salute.  Good-
humouredly smiling all over his broad forehead up into his crisp 
hair, he then defers to Miss Flite, as, with great stateliness, and 
at some length, she performs the courtly ceremony of presentation.  
He winds it up with another "Your servant, sir!" and another 
salute.

"Excuse me, sir.  A sailor, I believe?" says Mr. George.

"I am proud to find I have the air of one," returns Allan; "but I 
am only a sea-going doctor."

"Indeed, sir!  I should have thought you was a regular blue-jacket 
myself."

Allan hopes Mr. George will forgive his intrusion the more readily 
on that account, and particularly that he will not lay aside his 
pipe, which, in his politeness, he has testifled some intention of 
doing.  "You are very good, sir," returns the trooper.  "As I know 
by experience that it's not disagreeable to Miss Flite, and since 
it's equally agreeable to yourself--" and finishes the sentence by 
putting it between his lips again.  Allan proceeds to tell him all 
he knows about Jo, unto which the trooper listens with a grave 
face.

"And that's the lad, sir, is it?" he inquires, looking along the 
entry to where Jo stands staring up at the great letters on the 
whitewashed front, which have no meaning in his eyes.

"That's he," says Allan.  "And, Mr. George, I am in this difficulty 
about him.  I am unwilling to place him in a hospital, even if I 
could procure him immediate admission, because I foresee that he 
would not stay there many hours if he could be so much as got 
there.  The same objection applies to a workhouse, supposing I had 
the patience to be evaded and shirked, and handed about from post 
to pillar in trying to get him into one, which is a system that I 
don't take kindly to."

"No man does, sir," returns Mr. George.

"I am convinced that he would not remain in either place, because 
he is possessed by an extraordinary terror of this person who 
ordered him to keep out of the way; in his ignorance, he believes 
this person to be everywhere, and cognizant of everything."

"I ask your pardon, sir," says Mr. George.  "But you have not 
mentioned that party's name.  Is it a secret, sir?"

"The boy makes it one.  But his name is Bucket."

"Bucket the detective, sir?"

"The same man."

"The man is known to me, sir," returns the trooper after blowing 
out a cloud of smoke and squaring his chest, "and the boy is so far 
correct that he undoubtedly is a--rum customer."  Mr. George smokes 
with a profound meaning after this and surveys Miss Flite in 
silence.

"Now, I wish Mr. Jarndyce and Miss Summerson at least to know that 
this Jo, who tells so strange a story, has reappeared, and to have 
it in their power to speak with him if they should desire to do so.  
Therefore I want to get him, for the present moment, into any poor 
lodging kept by decent people where he would be admitted.  Decent 
people and Jo, Mr. George," says Allan, following the direction of 
the trooper's eyes along the entry, "have not been much acquainted, 
as you see.  Hence the difficulty.  Do you happen to know any one 
in this neighbourhood who would receive him for a while on my 
paying for him beforehand?"

As he puts the question, he becomes aware of a dirty-faced little 
man standing at the trooper's elbow and looking up, with an oddly 
twisted figure and countenance, into the trooper's face.  After a 
few more puffs at his pipe, the trooper looks down askant at the 
little man, and the little man winks up at the trooper.

"Well, sir," says Mr. George, "I can assure you that I would 
willingiy be knocked on the head at any time if it would be at all 
agreeable to Miss Summerson, and consequently I esteem it a 
privilege to do that young lady any service, however small.  We are 
naturally in the vagabond way here, sir, both myself and Phil.  You 
see what the place is.  You are welcome to a quiet corner of it for 
the boy if the same would meet your views.  No charge made, except 
for rations.  We are not in a flourishing state of circumstances 
here, sir.  We are liable to be tumbled out neck and crop at a 
moment's notice.  However, sir, such as the place is, and so long 
as it lasts, here it is at your service."

With a comprehensive wave of his pipe, Mr. George places the whole 
building at his visitor's disposal.

"I take it for granted, sir," he adds, "you being one of the 
medical staff, that there is no present infection about this 
unfortunate subject?"

Allan is quite sure of it.

"Because, sir," says Mr. George, shaking his head sorrowfully, "we 
have had enough of that."

His tone is no less sorrowfully echoed by his new acquaintance.  
'Still I am bound to tell you," observes Allan after repeating his 
former assurance, "that the boy is deplorably low and reduced and 
that he may be--I do not say that he is--too far gone to recover."

"Do you consider him in present danger, sir?" inquires the trooper.

"Yes, I fear so."

"Then, sir," returns the trooper in a decisive manner, "it appears 
to me--being naturally in the vagabond way myself--that the sooner 
he comes out of the street, the better.  You, Phil!  Bring him in!"

Mr. Squod tacks out, all on one side, to execute the word of 
command; and the trooper, having smoked his pipe, lays it by.  Jo 
is brought in.  He is not one of Mrs. Pardiggle's Tockahoopo 
Indians; he is not one of Mrs. Jellyby's lambs, being wholly 
unconnected with Borrioboola-Gha; he is not softened by distance 
and unfamiliarity; he is not a genuine foreign-grown savage; he is 
the ordinary home-made article.  Dirty, ugly, disagreeable to all 
the senses, in body a common creature of the common streets, only 
in soul a heathen.  Homely filth begrimes him, homely parasites 
devour him, homely sores are in him, homely rags are on him; native 
ignorance, the growth of English soil and climate, sinks his 
immortal nature lower than the beasts that perish.  Stand forth, 
Jo, in uncompromising colours!  From the sole of thy foot to the 
crown of thy head, there is nothing interesting about thee.

He shuffles slowly into Mr. George's gallery and stands huddled 
together in a bundle, looking all about the floor.  He seems to 
know that they have an inclination to shrink from him, partly for 
what he is and partly for what he has caused.  He, too, shrinks 
from them.  He is not of the same order of things, not of the same 
place in creation.  He is of no order and no place, neither of the 
beasts nor of humanity.

"Look here, Jo!" says Allan.  "This is Mr. George."

Jo searches the floor for some time longer, then looks up for a 
moment, and then down again.

"He is a kind friend to you, for he is going to give you lodging 
room here."

Jo makes a scoop with one hand, which is supposed to be a bow.  
After a little more consideration and some backing and changing of 
the foot on which he rests, he mutters that he is "wery thankful."

"You are quite safe here.  All you have to do at present is to be 
obedient and to get strong.  And mind you tell us the truth here, 
whatever you do, Jo."

"Wishermaydie if I don't, sir," says Jo, reverting to his favourite 
declaration.  "I never done nothink yit, but wot you knows on, to 
get myself into no trouble.  I never was in no other trouble at 
all, sir, 'sept not knowin' nothink and starwation."

"I believe it, now attend to Mr. George.  I see he is going to 
speak to you."

"My intention merely was, sir," observes Mr. George, amazingly 
broad and upright, "to point out to him where he can lie down and 
get a thorough good dose of sleep.  Now, look here."  As the 
trooper speaks, he conducts them to the other end of the gallery 
and opens one of the little cabins.  "There you are, you see!  Here 
is a mattress, and here you may rest, on good behaviour, as long as 
Mr., I ask your pardon, sir"--he refers apologetically to the card 
Allan has given him--"Mr. Woodcourt pleases.  Don't you be alarmed 
if you hear shots; they'll be aimed at the target, and not you.  
Now, there's another thing I would recommend, sir," says the 
trooper, turning to his visitor.  "Phil, come here!"

Phil bears down upon them according to his usual tactics.  "Here is 
a man, sir, who was found, when a baby, in the gutter.  
Consequently, it is to be expected that he takes a natural interest 
in this poor creature.  You do, don't you, Phil?"

"Certainly and surely I do, guv'ner," is Phil's reply.

"Now I was thinking, sir," says Mr. George in a martial sort of 
confidence, as if he were giving his opinion in a council of war at 
a drum-head, "that if this man was to take him to a bath and was to 
lay out a few shillings in getting him one or two coarse articles--"

"Mr. George, my considerate friend," returns Allan, taking out his 
purse, "it is the very favour I would have asked."

Phil Squod and Jo are sent out immediately on this work of 
improvement.  Miss Flite, quite enraptured by her success, makes 
the best of her way to court, having great fears that otherwise her 
friend the Chancellor may be uneasy about her or may give the 
judgment she has so long expected in her absence, and observing 
"which you know, my dear physician, and general, after so many 
years, would be too absurdly unfortunate!"  Allan takes the 
opportunity of going out to procure some restorative medicines, and 
obtaining them near at hand, soon returns to find the trooper 
walking up and down the gallery, and to fall into step and walk 
with him.

"I take it, sir," says Mr. George, "that you know Miss Summerson 
pretty well?"

Yes, it appears.

"Not related to her, sir?"

No, it appears.

"Excuse the apparent curiosity," says Mr. George.  "It seemed to me 
probable that you might take more than a common interest in this 
poor creature because Miss Summerson had taken that unfortunate 
interest in him.  'Tis MY case, sir, I assure you."

"And mine, Mr. George."

The trooper looks sideways at Allan's sunburnt cheek and bright 
dark eye, rapidly measures his height and build, and seems to 
approve of him.

"Since you have been out, sir, I have been thinking that I 
unquestionably know the rooms in Lincoln's Inn Fields, where Bucket 
took the lad, according to his account.  Though he is not 
acquainted with the name, I can help you to it.  It's Tulkinghorn.  
That's what it is."

Allan looks at him inquiringly, repeating the name.

"Tulkinghorn.  That's the name, sir.  I know the man, and know him 
to have been in communication with Bucket before, respecting a 
deceased person who had given him offence.  I know the man, sir.  
To my sorrow."

Allan naturally asks what kind of man he is.

"What kind of man!  Do you mean to look at?"

"I think I know that much of him.  I mean to deal with.  Generally, 
what kind of man?"

"Why, then I'll tell you, sir," returns the trooper, stopping short 
and folding his arms on his square chest so angrily that his face 
fires and flushes all over; "he is a confoundedly bad kind of man.  
He is a slow-torturing kind of man.  He is no more like flesh and 
blood than a rusty old carbine is.  He is a kind of man--by 
George!--that has caused me more restlessness, and more uneasiness, 
and more dissatisfaction with myself than all other men put 
together.  That's the kind of man Mr. Tulkinghorn is!"

"I am sorry," says Allan, "to have touched so sore a place."

"Sore?"  The trooper plants his legs wider apart, wets the palm of 
his broad right hand, and lays it on the imaginary moustache.  
"It's no fault of yours, sir; but you shall judge.  He has got a 
power over me.  He is the man I spoke of just now as being able to 
tumble me out of this place neck and crop.  He keeps me on a 
constant see-saw.  He won't hold off, and he won't come on.  If I 
have a payment to make him, or time to ask him for, or anything to 
go to him about, he don't see me, don't hear me--passes me on to 
Melchisedech's in Clifford's Inn, Melchisedech's in Clifford's Inn 
passes me back again to him--he keeps me prowling and dangling 
about him as if I was made of the same stone as himself.  Why, I 
spend half my life now, pretty well, loitering and dodging about 
his door.  What does he care?  Nothing.  Just as much as the rusty 
old carbine I have compared him to.  He chafes and goads me till--  
Bah!  Nonsense!  I am forgetting myself.  Mr. Woodcourt," the 
trooper resumes his march, "all I say is, he is an old man; but I 
am glad I shall never have the chance of setting spurs to my horse 
and riding at him in a fair field.  For if I had that chance, in 
one of the humours he drives me into--he'd go down, sir!"

Mr. George has been so excited that he finds it necessary to wipe 
his forehead on his shirt-sleeve.  Even while he whistles his 
impetuosity away with the national anthem, some involuntary 
shakings of his head and heavings of his chest still linger behind, 
not to mention an occasional hasty adjustment with both hands of 
his open shirt-collar, as if it were scarcely open enough to 
prevent his being troubled by a choking sensation.  In short, Allan 
Woodcourt has not much doubt about the going down of Mr. 
Tulkinghorn on the field referred to.

Jo and his conductor presently return, and Jo is assisted to his 
mattress by the careful Phil, to whom, after due administration of 
medicine by his own hands, Allan confides all needful means and 
instructions.  The morning is by this time getting on apace.  He 
repairs to his lodgings to dress and breakfast, and then, without 
seeking rest, goes away to Mr. Jarndyce to communicate his 
discovery.

With him Mr. Jarndyce returns alone, confidentially telling him 
that there are reasons for keeping this matter very quiet indeed 
and showing a serious interest in it.  To Mr. Jarndyce, Jo repeats 
in substance what he said in the morning, without any material 
variation.  Only that cart of his is heavier to draw, and draws 
with a hollower sound.

"Let me lay here quiet and not be chivied no more," falters Jo, 
"and be so kind any person as is a-passin nigh where I used fur to 
sleep, as jist to say to Mr. Sangsby that Jo, wot he known once, is 
a-moving on right forards with his duty, and I'll be wery thankful.  
I'd be more thankful than I am aready if it wos any ways possible 
for an unfortnet to be it."

He makes so many of these references to the law-stationer in the 
course of a day or two that Allan, after conferring with Mr. 
Jarndyce, good-naturedly resolves to call in Cook's Court, the 
rather, as the cart seems to be breaking down.

To Cook's Court, therefore, he repairs.  Mr. Snagsby is behind his 
counter in his grey coat and sleeves, inspecting an indenture of 
several skins which has just come in from the engrosser's, an 
immense desert of law-hand and parchment, with here and there a 
resting-place of a few large letters to break the awful monotony 
and save the traveller from despair.  Mr Snagsby puts up at one of 
these inky wells and greets the stranger with his cough of general 
preparation for business.

"You don't remember me, Mr. Snagsby?"

The stationer's heart begins to thump heavily, for his old 
apprehensions have never abated.  It is as much as he can do to 
answer, "No, sir, I can't say I do.  I should have considered--not 
to put too fine a point upon it--that I never saw you before, sir."

"Twice before," says Allan Woodcourt.  "Once at a poor bedside, and 
once--"

"It's come at last!" thinks the afflicted stationer, as 
recollection breaks upon him.  "It's got to a head now and is going 
to burst!"  But he has sufficient presence of mind to conduct his 
visitor into the little counting-house and to shut the door.

"Are you a married man, sir?"

"No, I am not."

"Would you make the attempt, though single," says Mr. Snagsby in a 
melancholy whisper, "to speak as low as you can?  For my little 
woman is a-listening somewheres, or I'll forfeit the business and 
five hundred pound!"

In deep dejection Mr. Snagsby sits down on his stool, with his back 
against his desk, protesting, "I never had a secret of my own, sir.  
I can't charge my memory with ever having once attempted to deceive 
my little woman on my own account since she named the day.  I 
wouldn't have done it, sir.  Not to put too fine a point upon it, I 
couldn't have done it, I dursn't have done it.  Whereas, and 
nevertheless, I find myself wrapped round with secrecy and mystery, 
till my life is a burden to me."

His visitor professes his regret to bear it and asks him does he 
remember Jo.  Mr. Snagsby answers with a suppressed groan, oh, 
don't he!

"You couldn't name an individual human being--except myself--that 
my little woman is more set and determined against than Jo," says 
Mr. Snagsby.

Allan asks why.

"Why?" repeats Mr. Snagsby, in his desperation clutching at the 
clump of hair at the back of his bald head.  "How should 1 know 
why?  But you are a single person, sir, and may you long be spared 
to ask a married person such a question!"

With this beneficent wish, Mr. Snagsby coughs a cough of dismal 
resignation and submits himself to hear what the visitor has to 
communicate.

"There again!" says Mr. Snagsby, who, between the earnestness of 
his feelings and the suppressed tones of his voice is discoloured 
in the face.  "At it again, in a new direction!  A certain person 
charges me, in the solemnest way, not to talk of Jo to any one, 
even my little woman.  Then comes another certain person, in the 
person of yourself, and charges me, in an equally solemn way, not 
to mention Jo to that other certain person above all other persons.  
Why, this is a private asylum!  Why, not to put too fine a point 
upon it, this is Bedlam, sir!" says Mr. Snagsby.

But it is better than he expected after all, being no explosion of 
the mine below him or deepening of the pit into which he has 
fallen.  And being tender-hearted and affected by the account he 
hears of Jo's condition, he readily engages to "look round" as 
early in the evening as he can manage it quietly.  He looks round 
very quietly when the evening comes, but it may turn out that Mrs. 
Snagsby is as quiet a manager as he.

Jo is very glad to see his old friend and says, when they are left 
alone, that he takes it uncommon kind as Mr. Sangsby should come so 
far out of his way on accounts of sich as him.  Mr. Snagsby, 
touched by the spectacle before him, immediately lays upon the 
table half a crown, that magic balsam of his for all kinds of 
wounds.

"And how do you find yourself, my poor lad?" inquires the stationer 
with his cough of sympathy.

"I am in luck, Mr. Sangsby, I am," returns Jo, "and don't want for 
nothink.  I'm more cumfbler nor you can't think.  Mr. Sangsby!  I'm 
wery sorry that I done it, but I didn't go fur to do it, sir."

The stationer softly lays down another half-crown and asks him what 
it is that he is sorry for having done.

"Mr. Sangsby," says Jo, "I went and giv a illness to the lady as 
wos and yit as warn't the t'other lady, and none of 'em never says 
nothink to me for having done it, on accounts of their being ser 
good and my having been s'unfortnet.  The lady come herself and see 
me yesday, and she ses, 'Ah, Jo!' she ses.  'We thought we'd lost 
you, Jo!' she ses.  And she sits down a-smilin so quiet, and don't 
pass a word nor yit a look upon me for having done it, she don't, 
and I turns agin the wall, I doos, Mr. Sangsby.  And Mr. Jarnders, 
I see him a-forced to turn away his own self.  And Mr. Woodcot, he 
come fur to giv me somethink fur to ease me, wot he's allus a-doin' 
on day and night, and wen he come a-bending over me and a-speakin 
up so bold, I see his tears a-fallin, Mr. Sangsby."

The softened stationer deposits another half-crown on the table.  
Nothing less than a repetition of that infallible remedy will 
relieve his feelings.

"Wot I was a-thinkin on, Mr. Sangsby," proceeds Jo, "wos, as you 
wos able to write wery large, p'raps?"

"Yes, Jo, please God," returns the stationer.

"Uncommon precious large, p'raps?" says Jo with eagerness.

"Yes, my poor boy."

Jo laughs with pleasure.  "Wot I wos a-thinking on then, Mr. 
Sangsby, wos, that when I wos moved on as fur as ever I could go 
and couldn't he moved no furder, whether you might be so good 
p'raps as to write out, wery large so that any one could see it 
anywheres, as that I wos wery truly hearty sorry that I done it and 
that I never went fur to do it, and that though I didn't know 
nothink at all, I knowd as Mr. Woodcot once cried over it and wos 
allus grieved over it, and that I hoped as he'd be able to forgive 
me in his mind.  If the writin could be made to say it wery large, 
he might."

"It shall say it, Jo.  Very large."

Jo laughs again.  "Thankee, Mr. Sangsby.  It's wery kind of you, 
sir, and it makes me more cumfbler nor I was afore."

The meek little stationer, with a broken and unfinished cough, 
slips down his fourth half-crown--he has never been so close to a 
case requiring so many--and is fain to depart.  And Jo and he, upon 
this little earth, shall meet no more.  No more.

For the cart so hard to draw is near its journey's end and drags 
over stony ground.  All round the clock it labours up the broken 
steps, shattered and worn.  Not many times can the sun rise and 
behold it still upon its weary road.

Phil Squod, with his smoky gunpowder visage, at once acts as nurse 
and works as armourer at his little table in a corner, often 
looking round and saying with a nod of his green-baize cap and an 
encouraging elevation of his one eyebrow, "Hold up, my boy!  Hold 
up!"  There, too, is Mr. Jarndyce many a time, and Allan Woodcourt 
almost always, both thinking, much, how strangely fate has 
entangled this rough outcast in the web of very different lives.  
There, too, the trooper is a frequent visitor, filling the doorway 
with his athletic figure and, from his superfluity of life and 
strength, seeming to shed down temporary vigour upon Jo, who never 
fails to speak more robustly in answer to his cheerful words.

Jo is in a sleep or in a stupor to-day, and Allan Woodcourt, newly 
arrived, stands by him, looking down upon his wasted form.  After a 
while he softly seats himself upon the bedside with his face 
towards him--just as he sat in the law-writer's room--and touches 
his chest and heart.  The cart had very nearly given up, but 
labours on a little more.

The trooper stands in the doorway, still and silent.  Phil has 
stopped in a low clinking noise, with his little hammer in his 
hand.  Mr. Woodcourt looks round with that grave professional 
interest and attention on his face, and glancing significantly at 
the trooper, signs to Phil to carry his table out.  When the little 
hammer is next used, there will be a speck of rust upon it.

"Well, Jo!  What is the matter?  Don't be frightened."

"I thought," says Jo, who has started and is looking round, "I 
thought I was in Tom-all-Alone's agin.  Ain't there nobody here but 
you, Mr. Woodcot?"

"Nobody."

"And I ain't took back to Tom-all-Alone's.  Am I, sir?"

"No."  Jo closes his eyes, muttering, "I'm wery thankful."

After watching him closely a little while, Allan puts his mouth 
very near his ear and says to him in a low, distinct voice, "Jo!  
Did you ever know a prayer?"

"Never knowd nothink, sir."

"Not so much as one short prayer?"

"No, sir.  Nothink at all.  Mr. Chadbands he wos a-prayin wunst at 
Mr. Sangsby's and I heerd him, but he sounded as if he wos a-
speakin to hisself, and not to me.  He prayed a lot, but I couldn't 
make out nothink on it.  Different times there was other genlmen 
come down Tom-all-Alone's a-prayin, but they all mostly sed as the 
t'other 'wuns prayed wrong, and all mostly sounded to be a-talking 
to theirselves, or a-passing blame on the t'others, and not a-
talkin to us.  WE never knowd nothink.  I never knowd what it wos 
all about."

It takes him a long time to say this, and few but an experienced 
and attentive listener could hear, or, hearing, understand him.  
After a short relapse into sleep or stupor, he makes, of a sudden, 
a strong effort to get out of bed.

"Stay, Jo!  What now?"

"It's time for me to go to that there berryin ground, sir," he 
returns with a wild look.

"Lie down, and tell me.  What burying ground, Jo?"

"Where they laid him as wos wery good to me, wery good to me 
indeed, he wos.  It's time fur me to go down to that there berryin 
ground, sir, and ask to be put along with him.  I wants to go there 
and be berried.  He used fur to say to me, 'I am as poor as you to-
day, Jo,' he ses.  I wants to tell him that I am as poor as him now 
and have come there to be laid along with him."

"By and by, Jo.  By and by."

"Ah!  P'raps they wouldn't do it if I wos to go myself.  But will 
you promise to have me took there, sir, and laid along with him?"

"I will, indeed."

"Thankee, sir.  Thankee, sir.  They'll have to get the key of the 
gate afore they can take me in, for it's allus locked.  And there's 
a step there, as I used for to clean with my broom.  It's turned 
wery dark, sir.  Is there any light a-comin?"

"It is coming fast, Jo."

Fast.  The cart is shaken all to pieces, and the rugged road is 
very near its end.

"Jo, my poor fellow!"

"I hear you, sir, in the dark, but I'm a-gropin--a-gropin--let me 
catch hold of your hand."

"Jo, can you say what I say?"

"I'll say anythink as you say, sir, for I knows it's good."

"Our Father."

"Our Father!  Yes, that's wery good, sir."

"Which art in heaven."

"Art in heaven--is the light a-comin, sir?"

"It is close at hand.  Hallowed by thy name!"

"Hallowed be--thy--"

The light is come upon the dark benighted way.  Dead!

Dead, your Majesty.  Dead, my lords and gentlemen.  Dead, right 
reverends and wrong reverends of every order.  Dead, men and women, 
born with heavenly compassion in your hearts.  And dying thus 
around us every day.



CHAPTER XLVIII

Closing in


The place in Lincolnshire has shut its many eyes again, and the 
house in town is awake.  In Lincolnshire the Dedlocks of the past 
doze in their picture-frames, and the low wind murmurs through the 
long drawing-room as if they were breathing pretty regularly.  In 
town the Dedlocks of the present rattle in their fire-eyed 
carriages through the darkness of the night, and the Dedlock 
Mercuries, with ashes (or hair-powder) on their heads, symptomatic 
of their great humility, loll away the drowsy mornings in the 
little windows of the hall.  The fashionable world--tremendous orb, 
nearly five miles round--is in full swing, and the solar system 
works respectfully at its appointed distances.

Where the throng is thickest, where the lights are brightest, where 
all the senses are ministered to with the greatest delicacy and 
refinement, Lady Dedlock is.  From the shining heights she has 
scaled and taken, she is never absent.  Though the belief she of 
old reposed in herself as one able to reserve whatsoever she would 
under her mantle of pride is beaten down, though she has no 
assurance that what she is to those around her she will remain 
another day, it is not in her nature when envious eyes are looking 
on to yield or to droop.  They say of her that she has lately grown 
more handsome and more haughty.  The debilitated cousin says of 
her that she's beauty nough--tsetup shopofwomen--but rather 
larming kind--remindingmanfact--inconvenient woman--who WILL 
getoutofbedandbawthstahlishment--Shakespeare.

Mr. Tulkinghorn says nothing, looks nothing.  Now, as heretofore, 
he is to be found in doorways of rooms, with his limp white cravat 
loosely twisted into its old-fashioned tie, receiving patronage 
from the peerage and making no sign.  Of all men he is still the 
last who might be supposed to have any influence upon my Lady.  Of 
all woman she is still the last who might be supposed to have any 
dread of him.

One thing has been much on her mind since their late interview in 
his turret-room at Chesney Wold.  She is now decided, and prepared 
to throw it off.

It is morning in the great world, afternoon according to the little 
sun.  The Mercuries, exhausted by looking out of window, are 
reposing in the hall and hang their heavy heads, the gorgeous 
creatures, like overblown sunflowers.  Like them, too, they seem to 
run to a deal of seed in their tags and trimmings.  Sir Leicester, 
in the library, has fallen asleep for the good of the country over 
the report of a Parliamentary committee.  My Lady sits in the room 
in which she gave audience to the young man of the name of Guppy.  
Rosa is with her and has been writing for her and reading to her.  
Rosa is now at work upon embroidery or some such pretty thing, and 
as she bends her head over it, my Lady watches her in silence.  Not 
for the first time to-day.

"Rosa."

The pretty village face looks brightly up.  Then, seeing how 
serious my Lady is, looks puzzled and surprised.

"See to the door.  Is it shut?"

Yes.  She goes to it and returns, and looks yet more surprised.

"I am about to place confidence in you, child, for I know I may 
trust your attachment, if not your judgment.  In what I am going to 
do, I will not disguise myself to you at least.  But I confide in 
you.  Say nothing to any one of what passes between us."

The timid little beauty promises in all earnestness to be 
trustworthy.

"Do you know," Lady Dedlock asks her, signing to her to bring her 
chair nearer, "do you know, Rosa, that I am different to you from 
what I am to any one?"

"Yes, my Lady.  Much kinder.  But then I often think I know you as 
you really are."

"You often think you know me as I really am?  Poor child, poor 
child!"

She says it with a kind of scorn--though not of Rosa--and sits 
brooding, looking dreamily at her.

"Do you think, Rosa, you are any relief or comfort to me?  Do you 
suppose your being young and natural, and fond of me and grateful 
to me, makes it any pleasure to me to have you near me?"

"I don't know, my Lady; I can scarcely hope so.  But with all my 
heart, I wish it was so."

"It is so, little one."

The pretty face is checked in its flush of pleasure by the dark 
expression on the handsome face before it.  It looks timidly for an 
explanation.

"And if I were to say to-day, 'Go! Leave me!' I should say what 
would give me great pain and disquiet, child, and what would leave 
me very solitary."

"My Lady!  Have I offended you?"

"In nothing.  Come here."

Rosa bends down on the footstool at my Lady's feet.  My Lady, with 
that motherly touch of the famous ironmaster night, lays her hand 
upon her dark hair and gently keeps it there.

"I told you, Rosa, that I wished you to be happy and that I would 
make you so if I could make anybody happy on this earth.  I cannot.  
There are reasons now known to me, reasons in which you have no 
part, rendering it far better for you that you should not remain 
here.  You must not remain here.  I have determined that you shall 
not.  I have written to the father of your lover, and he will be 
here to-day.  All this I have done for your sake."

The weeping girl covers her hand with kisses and says what shall 
she do, what shall she do, when they are separated!  Her mistress 
kisses her on the cheek and makes no other answer.

"Now, be happy, child, under better circumstances.  Be beloved and 
happy!"

"Ah, my Lady, I have sometimes thought--forgive my being so free--
that YOU are not happy."

"I!"

"Will you be more so when you have sent me away?  Pray, pray, think 
again.  Let me stay a little while!"

"I have said, my child, that what I do, I do for your sake, not my 
own.  It is done.  What I am towards you, Rosa, is what I am now--
not what I shall be a little while hence.  Remember this, and keep 
my confidence.  Do so much for my sake, and thus all ends between 
us!"

She detaches herself from her simple-hearted companion and leaves 
the room.  Late in the afternoon, when she next appears upon the 
staircase, she is in her haughtiest and coldest state.  As 
indifferent as if all passion, feeling, and interest had been worn 
out in the earlier ages of the world and had perished from its 
surface with its other departed monsters.

Mercury has announced Mr. Rouncewell, which is the cause of her 
appearance.  Mr. Rouncewell is not in the library, but she repairs 
to the library.  Sir Leicester is there, and she wishes to speak to 
him first.

"Sir Leicester, I am desirous--but you are engaged."

Oh, dear no!  Not at all.  Only Mr. Tulkinghorn.

Always at hand.  Haunting every place.  No relief or security from 
him for a moment.

"I beg your pardon, Lady Dedlock.  Will you allow me to retire?"

With a look that plainly says, "You know you have the power to 
remain if you will," she tells him it is not necessary and moves 
towards a chair.  Mr. Tulkinghorn brings it a little forward for 
her with his clumsy bow and retires into a window opposite.  
Interposed between her and the fading light of day in the now quiet 
street, his shadow falls upon her, and he darkens all before her.  
Even so does he darken her life.

It is a dull street under the best conditions, where the two long 
rows of houses stare at each other with that severity that half-a-
dozen of its greatest mansions seem to have been slowly stared into 
stone rather than originally built in that material.  It is a 
street of such dismal grandeur, so determined not to condescend to 
liveliness, that the doors and windows hold a gloomy state of their 
own in black paint and dust, and the echoing mews behind have a dry 
and massive appearance, as if they were reserved to stable the 
stone chargers of noble statues.  Complicated garnish of iron-work 
entwines itself over the flights of steps in this awful street, and 
from these petrified bowers, extinguishers for obsolete flambeaux 
gasp at the upstart gas.  Here and there a weak little iron hoop, 
through which bold boys aspire to throw their friends' caps (its 
only present use), retains its place among the rusty foliage, 
sacred to the memory of departed oil.  Nay, even oil itself, yet 
lingering at long intervals in a little absurd glass pot, with a 
knob in the bottom like an oyster, blinks and sulks at newer lights 
every night, like its high and dry master in the House of Lords.

Therefore there is not much that Lady Dedlock, seated in her chair, 
could wish to see through the window in which Mr. Tulkinghorn 
stands.  And yet--and yet--she sends a look in that direction as if 
it were her heart's desire to have that figure moved out of the 
way.

Sir Leicester begs his Lady's pardon.  She was about to say?

"Only that Mr. Rouncewell is here (he has called by my appointment) 
and that we had better make an end of the question of that girl.  I 
am tired to death of the matter."

"What can I do--to--assist?" demands Sir Leicester in some 
considerable doubt.

"Let us see him here and have done with it.  Will you tell them to 
send him up?"

"Mr. Tulkinghorn, be so good as to ring.  Thank you.  Request," 
says Sir Leicester to Mercury, not immediately remembering the 
business term, "request the iron gentleman to walk this way."

Mercury departs in search of the iron gentleman, finds, and 
produces him.  Sir Leicester receives that ferruginous person 
graciously.

"I hope you are well, Mr. Rouncewell.  Be seated.  (My solicitor, 
Mr. Tulkinghorn.)  My Lady was desirous, Mr. Rouncewell," Sir 
Leicester skilfully transfers him with a solemn wave of his hand, 
"was desirous to speak with you.  Hem!"

"I shall be very happy," returns the iron gentleman, "to give my 
best attention to anything Lady Dedlock does me the honour to say."

As he turns towards her, he finds that the impression she makes 
upon him is less agreeable than on the former occasion.  A distant 
supercilious air makes a cold atmosphere about her, and there is 
nothing in her bearing, as there was before, to encourage openness.

"Pray, sir," says Lady Dedlock listlessly, "may I be allowed to 
inquire whether anything has passed between you and your son 
respecting your son's fancy?"

It is almost too troublesome to her languid eyes to bestow a look 
upon him as she asks this question.

"If my memory serves me, Lady Dedlock, I said, when I had the 
pleasure of seeing you before, that I should seriously advise my 
son to conquer that--fancy."  The ironmaster repeats her expression 
with a little emphasis.

"And did you?"

"Oh! Of course I did."

Sir Leicester gives a nod, approving and confirmatory.  Very 
proper.  The iron gentleman, having said that he would do it, was 
bound to do it.  No difference in this respect between the base 
metals and the precious.  Highly proper.

"And pray has he done so?"

"Really, Lady Dedlock, I cannot make you a definite reply.  I fear 
not.  Probably not yet.  In our condition of life, we sometimes 
couple an intention with our--our fancies which renders them not 
altogether easy to throw off.  I think it is rather our way to be 
in earnest."

Sir Leicester has a misgiving that there may be a hidden Wat 
Tylerish meaning in this expression, and fumes a little.  Mr. 
Rouncewell is perfectly good-humoured and polite, but within such 
limits, evidently adapts his tone to his reception.

"Because," proceeds my Lady, "I have been thinking of the subject, 
which is tiresome to me."

"I am very sorry, I am sure."

"And also of what Sir Leicester said upon it, in which I quite 
concur"--Sir Leicester flattered--"and if you cannot give us the 
assurance that this fancy is at an end, I have come to the 
conclusion that the girl had better leave me."

"I can give no such assurance, Lady Dedlock.  Nothing of the kind."

"Then she had better go."

"Excuse me, my Lady," Sir Leicester considerately interposes, "but 
perhaps this may be doing an injury to the young woman which she 
has not merited.  Here is a young woman," says Sir Leicester, 
magnificently laying out the matter with his right hand like a 
service of plate, "whose good fortune it is to have attracted the 
notice and favour of an eminent lady and to live, under the 
protection of that eminent lady, surrounded by the various 
advantages which such a position confers, and which are 
unquestionably very great--I believe unquestionably very great, 
sir--for a young woman in that station of life.  The question then 
arises, should that young woman be deprived of these many 
advantages and that good fortune simply because she has"--Sir 
Leicester, with an apologetic but dignified inclination of his head 
towards the ironmaster, winds up his sentence--"has attracted the 
notice of Mr Rouncewell's son?  Now, has she deserved this 
punishment?  Is this just towards her?  Is this our previous 
understanding?"

"I beg your pardon," interposes Mr. Rouncewell's son's father.  
"Sir Leicester, will you allow me?  I think I may shorten the 
subject.  Pray dismiss that from your consideration.  If you 
remember anything so unimportant--which is not to be expected--you 
would recollect that my first thought in the affair was directly 
opposed to her remaining here."

Dismiss the Dedlock patronage from consideration?  Oh! Sir 
Leicester is bound to believe a pair of ears that have been handed 
down to him through such a family, or he really might have 
mistrusted their report of the iron gentleman's observations.

"It is not necessary," observes my Lady in her coldest manner 
before he can do anything but breathe amazedly, "to enter into 
these matters on either side.  The girl is a very good girl; I have 
nothing whatever to say against her, but she is so far insensible 
to her many advantages and her good fortune that she is in love--or 
supposes she is, poor little fool--and unable to appreciate them."

Sir Leicester begs to observe that wholly alters the case.  He 
might have been sure that my Lady had the best grounds and reasons 
in support of her view.  He entirely agrees with my Lady.  The 
young woman had better go.

"As Sir Leicester observed, Mr. Rouncewell, on the last occasion 
when we were fatigued by this business," Lady Dedlock languidly 
proceeds, "we cannot make conditions with you.  Without conditions, 
and under present circumstances, the girl is quite misplaced here 
and had better go.  I have told her so.  Would you wish to have her 
sent back to the village, or would you like to take her with you, 
or what would you prefer?"

"Lady Dedlock, if I may speak plainly--"

"By all means."

"--I should prefer the course which will the soonest relieve you of 
the incumbrance and remove her from her present position."

"And to speak as plainly," she returns with the same studied 
carelessness, "so should I.  Do I understand that you will take her 
with you?"

The iron gentleman makes an iron bow.

"Sir Leicester, will you ring?"  Mr. Tulkinghorn steps forward from 
his window and pulls the bell.  "I had forgotten you.  Thank you."  
He makes his usual bow and goes quietly back again.  Mercury, 
swift-responsive, appears, receives instructions whom to produce, 
skims away, produces the aforesaid, and departs.

Rosa has been crying and is yet in distress.  On her coming in, the 
ironmaster leaves his chair, takes her arm in his, and remains with 
her near the door ready to depart.

"You are taken charge of, you see," says my Lady in her weary 
manner, "and are going away well protected.  I have mentioned that 
you are a very good girl, and you have nothing to cry for."

"She seems after all," observes Mr. Tulkinghorn, loitering a little 
forward with his hands behind him, "as if she were crying at going 
away."

"Why, she is not well-bred, you see," returns Mr. Rouncewell with 
some quickness in his manner, as if he were glad to have the lawyer 
to retort upon, "and she is an inexperienced little thing and knows 
no better.  If she had remained here, sir, she would have improved, 
no doubt."

"No doubt," is Mr. Tulkinghorn's composed reply.

Rosa sobs out that she is very sorry to leave my Lady, and that she 
was happy at Chesney Wold, and has been happy with my Lady, and 
that she thanks my Lady over and over again.  "Out, you silly 
little puss!" says the ironmaster, checking her in a low voice, 
though not angrily.  "Have a spirit, if you're fond of Watt!"  My 
Lady merely waves her off with indifference, saying, "There, there, 
child!  You are a good girl.  Go away!"  Sir Leicester has 
magnificently disengaged himself from the subject and retired into 
the sanctuary of his blue coat.  Mr. Tulkinghorn, an indistinct 
form against the dark street now dotted with lamps, looms in my 
Lady's view, bigger and blacker than before.

"Sir Leicester and Lady Dedlock," says Mr. Rouncewell after a pause 
of a few moments, "I beg to take my leave, with an apology for 
having again troubled you, though not of my own act, on this 
tiresome subject.  I can very well understand, I assure you, how 
tiresome so small a matter must have become to Lady Dedlock.  If I 
am doubtful of my dealing with it, it is only because I did not at 
first quietly exert my influence to take my young friend here away 
without troubling you at all.  But it appeared to me--I dare say 
magnifying the importance of the thing--that it was respectful to 
explain to you how the matter stood and candid to consult your 
wishes and convenience.  I hope you will excuse my want of 
acquaintance with the polite world."

Sir Leicester considers himself evoked out of the sanctuary by 
these remarks.  "Mr. Rouncewell," he returns, "do not menfion it.  
Justifications are unnecessary, I hope, on either side."

"I am glad to hear it, Sir Leicester; and if I may, by way of a 
last word, revert to what I said before of my mother's long 
connexion with the family and the worth it bespeaks on both sides, 
I would point out this little instance here on my arm who shows 
herself so affectionate and faithful in parting and in whom my 
mother, I dare say, has done something to awaken such feelings--
though of course Lady Dedlock, by her heartfelt interest and her 
genial condescension, has done much more.

If he mean this ironically, it may be truer than he thinks.  He 
points it, however, by no deviation from his straightforward manner 
of speech, though in saying it he turns towards that part of the 
dim room where my Lady sits.  Sir Leicester stands to return his 
parting salutation, Mr. Tulkinghorn again rings, Mercury takes 
another flight, and Mr. Rouncewell and Rosa leave the house.

Then lights are brought in, discovering Mr. Tulkinghorn still 
standing in his window with his hands behind him and my Lady still 
sitting with his figure before her, closing up her view of the 
night as well as of the day.  She is very pale.  Mr. Tulkinghorn, 
observing it as she rises to retire, thinks, "Well she may be!  The 
power of this woman is astonishing.  She has been acting a part the 
whole time."  But he can act a part too--his one unchanging 
character--and as he holds the door open for this woman, fifty 
pairs of eyes, each fifty times sharper than Sir Leicester's pair, 
should find no flaw in him.

Lady Dedlock dines alone in her own room to-day.  Sir Leicester is 
whipped in to the rescue of the Doodle Party and the discomfiture 
of the Coodle Faction.  Lady Dedlock asks on sitting down to 
dinner, still deadly pale (and quite an illustration of the 
debilitated cousin's text), whether he is gone out?  Yes.  Whether 
Mr. Tulkinghorn is gone yet?  No.  Presently she asks again, is he 
gone YET?  No.  What is he doing?  Mercury thinks he is writing 
letters in the library.  Would my Lady wish to see him?  Anything 
but that.

But he wishes to see my Lady.  Within a few more minutes he is 
reported as sending his respects, and could my Lady please to 
receive him for a word or two after her dinner?  My Lady will 
receive him now.  He comes now, apologizing for intruding, even by 
her permission, while she is at table.  When they are alone, my 
Lady waves her hand to dispense with such mockeries.

"What do you want, sir?"

"Why, Lady Dedlock," says the lawyer, taking a chair at a little 
distance from her and slowly rubbing his rusty legs up and down, up 
and down, up and down, "I am rather surprised by the course you 
have taken."

"Indeed?"

"Yes, decidedly.  I was not prepared for it.  I consider it a 
departure from our agreement and your promise.  It puts us in a new 
position, Lady Dedlock.  I feel myself under the necessity of 
saying that I don't approve of it."

He stops in his rubbing and looks at her, with his hands on his 
knees.  Imperturbable and unchangeable as he is, there is still an 
indefinable freedom in his manner which is new and which does not 
escape this woman's observation.

"I do not quite understand you."

"Oh, yes you do, I think.  I think you do.  Come, come, Lady 
Dedlock, we must not fence and parry now.  You know you like this 
girl."

"Well, sir?"

"And you know--and I know--that you have not sent her away for the 
reasons you have assigned, but for the purpose of separating her as 
much as possible from--excuse my mentioning it as a matter of 
business--any reproach and exposure that impend over yourself."

"Well, sir?"

"Well, Lady Dedlock," returns the lawyer, crossing his legs and 
nursing the uppermost knee.  "I object to that.  I consider that a 
dangerous proceeding.  I know it to be unnecessary and calculated 
to awaken speculation, doubt, rumour, I don't know what, in the 
house.  Besides, it is a violation of our agreement.  You were to 
be exactly what you were before.  Whereas, it must be evident to 
yourself, as it is to me, that you have been this evening very 
different from what you were before.  Why, bless my soul, Lady 
Dedlock, transparenfly so!"

"If, sir," she begins, "in my knowledge of my secret--"  But he 
interrupts her.

"Now, Lady Dedlock, this is a matter of business, and in a matter 
of business the ground cannot be kept too clear.  It is no longer 
your secret.  Excuse me.  That is just the mistake.  It is my 
secret, in trust for Sir Leicester and the family.  If it were your 
secret, Lady Dedlock, we should not be here holding this 
conversation."

"That is very true.  If in my knowledge of THE secret I do what I 
can to spare an innocent girl (especially, remembering your own 
reference to her when you told my story to the assembled guests at 
Chesney Wold) from the taint of my impending shame, I act upon a 
resolution I have taken.  Nothing in the world, and no one in the 
world, could shake it or could move me."  This she says with great 
deliberation and distinctness and with no more outward passion than 
himself.  As for him, he methodically discusses his matter of 
business as if she were any insensible instrument used in business.

"Really?  Then you see, Lady Dedlock," he returns, "you are not to 
be trusted.  You have put the case in a perfecfly plain way, and 
according to the literal fact; and that being the case, you are not 
to be trusted."

"Perhaps you may remember that I expressed some anxiety on this 
same point when we spoke at night at Chesney Wold?"

"Yes," says Mr. Tulkinghorn, coolly getting up and standing on the 
hearth.  "Yes.  I recollect, Lady Dedlock, that you certainly 
referred to the girl, but that was before we came to our 
arrangement, and both the letter and the spirit of our arrangement 
altogether precluded any action on your part founded upon my 
discovery.  There can be no doubt about that.  As to sparing the 
girl, of what importance or value is she?  Spare!  Lady Dedlock, 
here is a family name compromised.  One might have supposed that 
the course was straight on--over everything, neither to the right 
nor to the left, regardless of all considerations in the way, 
sparing nothing, treading everything under foot."

She has been looking at the table.  She lifts up her eyes and looks 
at him.  There is a stern expression on her face and a part of her 
lower lip is compressed under her teeth.  "This woman understands 
me," Mr. Tulkinghorn thinks as she lets her glance fall again.  
"SHE cannot be spared.  Why should she spare others?"

For a little while they are silent.  Lady Dedlock has eaten no 
dinner, but has twice or thrice poured out water with a steady hand 
and drunk it.  She rises from table, takes a lounging-chair, and 
reclines in it, shading her face.  There is nothing in her manner 
to express weakness or excite compassion.  It is thoughtful, 
gloomy, concentrated.  "This woman," thinks Mr. Tulkinghorn, 
standing on the hearth, again a dark object closing up her view, 
"is a study."

He studies her at his leisure, not speaking for a time.  She too 
studies something at her leisure.  She is not the first to speak, 
appearing indeed so unlikely to be so, though he stood there until 
midnight, that even he is driven upon breaking silence.

"Lady Dedlock, the most disagreeable part of this business 
interview remains, but it is business.  Our agreement is broken.  A 
lady of your sense and strength of character will be prepared for 
my now declaring it void and taking my own course."

"I am quite prepared."

Mr. Tulkinghorn inclines his head.  "That is all I have to trouble 
you with, Lady Dedlock."

She stops him as he is moving out of the room by asking, "This is 
the notice I was to receive?  I wish not to misapprehend you."

"Not exactly the notice you were to receive, Lady Dedlock, because 
the contemplated notice supposed the agreement to have been 
observed.  But virtually the same, virtually the same.  The 
difference is merely in a lawyer's mind."

"You intend to give me no other notice?"

"You are right.  No."

"Do you contemplate undeceiving Sir Leicester to-night?"

"A home question!" says Mr. Tulkinghorn with a slight smile and 
cautiously shaking his head at the shaded face.  "No, not to-
night."

"To-morrow?"

"All things considered, I had better decline answering that 
question, Lady Dedlock.  If I were to say I don't know when, 
exactly, you would not believe me, and it would answer no purpose.  
It may be to-morrow.  I would rather say no more.  You are 
prepared, and I hold out no expectations which circumstances might 
fail to justify.  I wish you good evening."

She removes her hand, turns her pale face towards him as he walks 
silently to the door, and stops him once again as he is about to 
open it.

"Do you intend to remain in the house any time?  I heard you were 
writing in the library.  Are you going to return there?"

"Only for my hat.  I am going home."

She bows her eyes rather than her head, the movement is so slight 
and curious, and he withdraws.  Clear of the room he looks at his 
watch but is inclined to doubt it by a minute or thereabouts.  
There is a splendid clock upon the staircase, famous, as splendid 
clocks not often are, for its accuracy.  "And what do YOU say," Mr. 
Tulkinghorn inquires, referring to it.  "What do you say?"

If it said now, "Don't go home!"  What a famous clock, hereafter, 
if it said to-night of all the nights that it has counted off, to 
this old man of all the young and old men who have ever stood 
before it, "Don't go home!"  With its sharp clear bell it strikes 
three quarters after seven and ticks on again.  "Why, you are worse 
than I thought you," says Mr. Tulkinghorn, muttering reproof to his 
watch.  "Two minutes wrong?  At this rate you won't last my time."  
What a watch to return good for evil if it ticked in answer, "Don't 
go home!"

He passes out into the streets and walks on, with his hands behind 
him, under the shadow of the lofty houses, many of whose mysteries, 
difficulties, mortgages, delicate affairs of all kinds, are 
treasured up within his old black satin waistcoat.  He is in the 
confidence of the very bricks and mortar.  The high chimney-stacks 
telegraph family secrets to him.  Yet there is not a voice in a 
mile of them to whisper, "Don't go home!"

Through the stir and motion of the commoner streets; through the 
roar and jar of many vehicles, many feet, many voices; with the 
blazing shop-lights lighting him on, the west wind blowing him on, 
and the crowd pressing him on, he is pitilessly urged upon his way, 
and nothing meets him murmuring, "Don't go home!"  Arrived at last 
in his dull room to light his candles, and look round and up, and 
see the Roman pointing from the ceiling, there is no new 
significance in the Roman's hand to-night or in the flutter of the 
attendant groups to give him the late warning, "Don't come here!"

It is a moonlight night, but the moon, being past the full, is only 
now rising over the great wilderness of London.  The stars are 
shining as they shone above the turret-leads at Chesney Wold.  This 
woman, as he has of late been so accustomed to call her, looks out 
upon them.  Her soul is turbulent within her; she is sick at heart 
and restless.  The large rooms are too cramped and close.  She 
cannot endure their restraint and will walk alone in a neighbouring 
garden.

Too capricious and imperious in all she does to be the cause of 
much surprise in those about her as to anything she does, this 
woman, loosely muffled, goes out into the moonlight.  Mercury 
attends with the key.  Having opened the garden-gate, he delivers 
the key into his Lady's hands at her request and is bidden to go 
back.  She will walk there some time to ease her aching head.  She 
may be an hour, she may be more.  She needs no further escort.  The 
gate shuts upon its spring with a clash, and he leaves her passing 
on into the dark shade of some trees.

A fine night, and a bright large moon, and multitudes of stars.  
Mr. Tulkinghorn, in repairing to his cellar and in opening and 
shutting those resounding doors, has to cross a little prison-like 
yard.  He looks up casually, thinking what a fine night, what a 
bright large moon, what multitudes of stars!  A quiet night, too.

A very quiet night.  When the moon shines very brilliantly, a 
solitude and stillness seem to proceed from her that influence even 
crowded places full of life.  Not only is it a still night on dusty 
high roads and on hill-summits, whence a wide expanse of country 
may be seen in repose, quieter and quieter as it spreads away into 
a fringe of trees against the sky with the grey ghost of a bloom 
upon them; not only is it a still night in gardens and in woods, 
and on the river where the water-meadows are fresh and green, and 
the stream sparkles on among pleasant islands, murmuring weirs, and 
whispering rushes; not only does the stillness attend it as it 
flows where houses cluster thick, where many bridges are reflected 
in it, where wharves and shipping make it black and awful, where it 
winds from these disfigurements through marshes whose grim beacons 
stand like skeletons washed ashore, where it expands through the 
bolder region of rising grounds, rich in cornfield wind-mill and 
steeple, and where it mingles with the ever-heaving sea; not only 
is it a still night on the deep, and on the shore where the watcher 
stands to see the ship with her spread wings cross the path of 
light that appears to be presented to only him; but even on this 
stranger's wilderness of London there is some rest.  Its steeples 
and towers and its one great dome grow more ethereal; its smoky 
house-tops lose their grossness in the pale effulgence; the noises 
that arise from the streets are fewer and are softened, and the 
footsteps on the pavements pass more tranquilly away.  In these 
fields of Mr. Tulkinghorn's inhabiting, where the shepherds play on 
Chancery pipes that have no stop, and keep their sheep in the fold 
by hook and by crook until they have shorn them exceeding close, 
every noise is merged, this moonlight night, into a distant ringing 
hum, as if the city were a vast glass, vibrating.

What's that?  Who fired a gun or pistol?  Where was it?

The few foot-passengers start, stop, and stare about them.  Some 
windows and doors are opened, and people come out to look.  It was 
a loud report and echoed and rattled heavily.  It shook one house, 
or so a man says who was passing.  It has aroused all the dogs in 
the neighbourhood, who bark vehemently.  Terrified cats scamper 
across the road.  While the dogs are yet barking and howling--there 
is one dog howling like a demon--the church-clocks, as if they were 
startled too, begin to strike.  The hum from the streets, likewise, 
seems to swell into a shout.  But it is soon over.  Before the last 
clock begins to strike ten, there is a lull.  When it has ceased, 
the fine night, the bright large moon, and multitudes of stars, are 
left at peace again.

Has Mr. Tulkinghorn been disturbed?  His windows are dark and 
quiet, and his door is shut.  It must be something unusual indeed 
to bring him out of his shell.  Nothing is heard of him, nothing is 
seen of him.  What power of cannon might it take to shake that 
rusty old man out of his immovable composure?

For many years the persistent Roman has been pointing, with no 
particular meaning, from that ceiling.  It is not likely that he 
has any new meaning in him to-night.  Once pointing, always 
pointing--like any Roman, or even Briton, with a single idea.  
There he is, no doubt, in his impossible attitude, pointing, 
unavailingly, all night long.  Moonlight, darkness, dawn, sunrise, 
day.  There he is still, eagerly pointing, and no one minds him.

But a little after the coming of the day come people to clean the 
rooms.  And either the Roman has some new meaning in him, not 
expressed before, or the foremost of them goes wild, for looking up 
at his outstretched hand and looking down at what is below it, that 
person shrieks and flies.  The others, looking in as the first one 
looked, shriek and fly too, and there is an alarm in the street.

What does it mean?  No light is admitted into the darkened chamber, 
and people unaccustomed to it enter, and treading softly but 
heavily, carry a weight into the bedroom and lay it down.  There is 
whispering and wondering all day, strict search of every corner, 
careful tracing of steps, and careful noting of the disposition of 
every article of furniture.  All eyes look up at the Roman, and all 
voices murmur, "If he could only tell what he saw!"

He is pointing at a table with a bottle (nearly full of wine) and a 
glass upon it and two candles that were blown out suddenly soon 
after being lighted.  He is pointing at an empty chair and at a 
stain upon the ground before it that might be almost covered with a 
hand.  These objects lie directly within his range.  An excited 
imagination might suppose that there was something in them so 
terrific as to drive the rest of the composition, not only the 
attendant big-legged boys, but the clouds and flowers and pillars 
too--in short, the very body and soul of Allegory, and all the 
brains it has--stark mad.  It happens surely that every one who 
comes into the darkened room and looks at these things looks up at 
the Roman and that he is invested in all eyes with mystery and awe, 
as if he were a paralysed dumb witness.

So it shall happen surely, through many years to come, that ghostly 
stories shall be told of the stain upon the floor, so easy to be 
covered, so hard to be got out, and that the Roman, pointing from 
the ceiling shall point, so long as dust and damp and spiders spare 
him, with far greater significance than he ever had in Mr. 
Tulkinghorn's time, and with a deadly meaning.  For Mr. 
Tulkinghorn's time is over for evermore, and the Roman pointed at 
the murderous hand uplifted against his life, and pointed 
helplessly at him, from night to morning, lying face downward on 
the floor, shot through the heart.



CHAPTER XLIX

Dutiful Friendship


A great annual occasion has come round in the establishment of Mr. 
Matthew Bagnet, otherwise Lignum Vitae, ex-artilleryman and present 
bassoon-player.  An occasion of feasting and festival.  The 
celebration of a birthday in the family.

It is not Mr. Bagnet's birthday.  Mr. Bagnet merely distinguishes 
that epoch in the musical instrument business by kissing the 
children with an extra smack before breakfast, smoking an 
additional pipe after dinner, and wondering towards evening what 
his poor old mother is thinking about it--a subject of infinite 
speculation, and rendered so by his mother having departed this 
life twenty years.  Some men rarely revert to their father, but 
seem, in the bank-books of their remembrance, to have transferred 
all the stock of filial affection into their mother's name.  Mr. 
Bagnet is one of like his trade the better for that.  If I had kept 
clear of his old girl causes him usually to make the noun-
substantive "goodness" of the feminine gender.

It is not the birthday of one of the three children.  Those 
occasions are kept with some marks of distinction, but they rarely 
overleap the bounds of happy returns and a pudding.  On young 
Woolwich's last birthday, Mr. Bagnet certainly did, after observing 
on his growth and general advancement, proceed, in a moment of 
profound reflection on the changes wrought by time, to examine him 
in the catechism, accomplishing with extreme accuracy the questions 
number one and two, "What is your name?" and "Who gave you that 
name?" but there failing in the exact precision of his memory and 
substituting for number three the question "And how do you like 
that name?" which he propounded with a sense of its importance, in 
itself so edifying and improving as to give it quite an orthodox 
air.  This, however, was a speciality on that particular birthday, 
and not a general solemnity.

It is the old girl's birthday, and that is the greatest holiday and 
reddest-letter day in Mr. Bagnet's calendar.  The auspicious event 
is always commemorated according to certain forms settled and 
prescribed by Mr. Bagnet some years since.  Mr. Bagnet, being 
deeply convinced that to have a pair of fowls for dinner is to 
attain the highest pitch of imperial luxury, invariably goes forth 
himself very early in the morning of this day to buy a pair; he is, 
as invariably, taken in by the vendor and installed in the 
possession of the oldest inhabitants of any coop in Europe.  
Returning with these triumphs of toughness tied up in a clean blue 
and white cotton handkerchief (essential to the arrangements), he 
in a casual manner invites Mrs. Bagnet to declare at breakfast what 
she would like for dinner.  Mrs. Bagnet, by a coincidence never 
known to fail, replying fowls, Mr. Bagnet instantly produces his 
bundle from a place of concealment amidst general amazement and 
rejoicing.  He further requires that the old girl shall do nothing 
all day long but sit in her very best gown and be served by himself 
and the young people.  As he is not illustrious for his cookery, 
this may be supposed to be a matter of state rather than enjoyment 
on the old girl's part, but she keeps her state with all imaginable 
cheerfulness.

On this present birthday, Mr. Bagnet has accomplished the usual 
preliminaries.  He has bought two specimens of poultry, which, if 
there be any truth in adages, were certainly not caught with chaff, 
to be prepared for the spit; he has amazed and rejoiced the family 
by their unlooked-for production; he is himself directing the 
roasting of the poultry; and Mrs. Bagnet, with her wholesome brown 
fingers itching to prevent what she sees going wrong, sits in her 
gown of ceremony, an honoured guest.

Quebec and Malta lay the cloth for dinner, while Woolwich, serving, 
as beseems him, under his father, keeps the fowls revolving.  To 
these young scullions Mrs. Bagnet occasionally imparts a wink, or a 
shake of the head, or a crooked face, as they made mistakes.

"At half after one."  Says Mr. Bagnet.  "To the minute.  They'll be 
done."

Mrs. Bagnet, with anguish, beholds one of them at a standstill 
before the fire and beginning to burn.

"You shall have a dinner, old girl," says Mr. Bagnet.  "Fit for a 
queen."

Mrs. Bagnet shows her white teeth cheerfully, but to the perception 
of her son, betrays so much uneasiness of spirit that he is 
impelled by the dictates of affection to ask her, with his eyes, 
what is the matter, thus standing, with his eyes wide open, more 
oblivious of the fowls than before, and not affording the least 
hope of a return to consciousness.  Fortunately his elder sister 
perceives the cause of the agitation in Mrs. Bagnet's breast and 
with an admonitory poke recalls him.  The stopped fowls going round 
again, Mrs. Bagnet closes her eyes in the intensity of her relief.

"George will look us up," says Mr. Bagnet.  "At half after four.  
To the moment.  How many years, old girl.  Has George looked us up.  
This afternoon?"

"Ah, Lignum, Lignum, as many as make an old woman of a young one, I 
begin to think.  Just about that, and no less," returns Mrs. 
Bagnet, laughing and shaking her head.

"Old girl," says Mr. Bagnet, "never mind.  You'd be as young as 
ever you was.  If you wasn't younger.  Which you are.  As everybody 
knows."

Quebec and Malta here exclaim, with clapping of hands, that Bluffy 
is sure to bring mother something, and begin to speculate on what 
it will be.

"Do you know, Lignum," says Mrs. Bagnet, casting a glance on the 
table-cloth, and winking "salt!" at Malta with her right eye, and 
shaking the pepper away from Quebec with her head, "I begin to 
think George is in the roving way again.

"George," returns Mr. Bagnet, "will never desert.  And leave his 
old comrade.  In the lurch.  Don't be afraid of it."

"No, Lignum.  No.  I don't say he will.  I don't think he will.  
But if he could get over this money trouble of his, I believe he 
would be off."

Mr. Bagnet asks why.

"Well," returns his wife, considering, "George seems to me to be 
getting not a little impatient and restless.  I don't say but what 
he's as free as ever.  Of course he must be free or he wouldn't be 
George, but he smarts and seems put out."

"He's extra-drilled," says Mr. Bagnet.  "By a lawyer.  Who would 
put the devil out."

"There's something in that," his wife assents; "but so it is, 
Lignum."

Further conversation is prevented, for the time, by the necessity 
under which Mr. Bagnet finds himself of directing the whole force 
of his mind to the dinner, which is a little endangered by the dry 
humour of the fowls in not yielding any gravy, and also by the made 
gravy acquiring no flavour and turning out of a flaxen complexion.  
With a similar perverseness, the potatoes crumble off forks in the 
process of peeling, upheaving from their centres in every 
direction, as if they were subject to earthquakes.  The legs of the 
fowls, too, are longer than could be desired, and extremely scaly.  
Overcoming these disadvantages to the best of his ability, Mr. 
Bagnet at last dishes and they sit down at table, Mrs. Bagnet 
occupying the guest's place at his right hand.

It is well for the old girl that she has but one birthday in a 
year, for two such indulgences in poultry might be injurious.  
Every kind of finer tendon and ligament that is in the nature of 
poultry to possess is developed in these specimens in the singular 
form of guitar-strings.  Their limbs appear to have struck roots 
into their breasts and bodies, as aged trees strike roots into the 
earth.  Their legs are so hard as to encourage the idea that they 
must have devoted the greater part of their long and arduous lives 
to pedestrian exercises and the walking of matches.  But Mr. 
Bagnet, unconscious of these little defects, sets his heart on Mrs. 
Bagnet eating a most severe quantity of the delicacies before her; 
and as that good old girl would not cause him a moment's 
disappointment on any day, least of all on such a day, for any 
consideration, she imperils her digestion fearfully.  How young 
Woolwich cleans the drum-sticks without being of ostrich descent, 
his anxious mother is at a loss to understand.

The old girl has another trial to undergo after the conclusion of 
the repast in sitting in state to see the room cleared, the hearth 
swept, and the dinner-service washed up and polished in the 
backyard.  The great delight and energy with which the two young 
ladies apply themselves to these duties, turning up their skirts in 
imitation of their mother and skating in and out on little 
scaffolds of pattens, inspire the highest hopes for the future, but 
some anxiety for the present.  The same causes lead to confusion of 
tongues, a clattering of crockery, a rattling of tin mugs, a 
whisking of brooms, and an expenditure of water, all in excess, 
while the saturation of the young ladies themselves is almost too 
moving a spectacle for Mrs. Bagnet to look upon with the calmness 
proper to her position.  At last the various cleansing processes 
are triumphantly completed; Quebec and Malta appear in fresh 
attire, smiling and dry; pipes, tobacco, and something to drink are 
placed upon the table; and the old girl enjoys the first peace of 
mind she ever knows on the day of this delightful entertainment.

When Mr. Bagnet takes his usual seat, the hands of the clock are 
very near to half-past four; as they mark it accurately, Mr. Bagnet 
announces, "George!  Military time."

It is George, and he has hearty congratulations for the old girl 
(whom he kisses on the great occasion), and for the children, and 
for Mr. Bagnet.  "Happy returns to all!" says Mr. George.

"But, George, old man!" cries Mrs. Bagnet, looking at him 
curiously.  "What's come to you?"

"Come to me?"

"Ah! You are so white, George--for you--and look so shocked.  Now 
don't he, Lignum?"

"George," says Mr. Bagnet, "tell the old girl.  What's the matter."

"I didn't know I looked white," says the trooper, passing his hand 
over his brow, "and I didn't know I looked shocked, and I'm sorry I 
do.  But the truth is, that boy who was taken in at my place died 
yesterday afternoon, and it has rather knocked me over."

"Poor creetur!" says Mrs. Bagnet with a mother's pity.  "Is he 
gone?  Dear, dear!"

"I didn't mean to say anything about it, for it's not birthday 
talk, but you have got it out of me, you see, before I sit down.  I 
should have roused up in a minute," says the trooper, making 
himself speak more gaily, "but you're so quick, Mrs. Bagnet."

"You're right.  The old girl," says Mr. Bagnet.  "Is as quick.  As 
powder."

"And what's more, she's the subject of the day, and we'll stick to 
her," cries Mr. George.  "See here, I have brought a little brooch 
along with me.  It's a poor thing, you know, but it's a keepsake.  
That's all the good it is, Mrs. Bagnet."

Mr. George produces his present, which is greeted with admiring 
leapings and clappings by the young family, and with a species of 
reverential admiration by Mr. Bagnet.  "Old girl," says Mr. Bagnet.  
"Tell him my opinion of it."

"Why, it's a wonder, George!" Mrs. Bagnet exclaims.  "It's the 
beautifullest thing that ever was seen!"

"Good!" says Mr. Bagnet.  "My opinion."

"It's so pretty, George," cries Mrs. Bagnet, turning it on all 
sides and holding it out at arm's length, "that it seems too choice 
for me."

"Bad!" says Mr. Bagnet.  "Not my opinlon."

"But whatever it is, a hundred thousand thanks, old fellow," says 
Mrs. Bagnet, her eyes sparkling with pleasure and her hand 
stretched out to him; "and though I have been a crossgrained 
soldier's wife to you sometimes, George, we are as strong friends, 
I am sure, in reality, as ever can be.  Now you shall fasten it on 
yourself, for good luck, if you will, George."

The children close up to see it done, and Mr. Bagnet looks over 
young Woolwich's head to see it done with an interest so maturely 
wooden, yet pleasantly childish, that Mrs. Bagnet cannot help 
laughing in her airy way and saying, "Oh, Lignum, Lignum, what a 
precious old chap you are!"  But the trooper fails to fasten the 
brooch.  His hand shakes, he is nervous, and it falls off.  "Would 
any one believe this?" says he, catching it as it drops and looking 
round.  "I am so out of sorts that I bungle at an easy job like 
this!"

Mrs. Bagnet concludes that for such a case there is no remedy like 
a pipe, and fastening the brooch herself in a twinkling, causes the 
trooper to be inducted into his usual snug place and the pipes to 
be got into action.  "If that don't bring you round, George," says 
she, "just throw your eye across here at your present now and then, 
and the two together MUST do it."

"You ought to do it of yourself," George answers; "I know that very 
well, Mrs. Bagnet.  I'll tell you how, one way and another, the 
blues have got to be too many for me.  Here was this poor lad.  
'Twas dull work to see him dying as he did, and not be able to help 
him."

"What do you mean, George?  You did help him.  You took him under 
your roof."

"I helped him so far, but that's little.  I mean, Mrs. Bagnet, 
there he was, dying without ever having been taught much more than 
to know his right hand from his left.  And he was too far gone to 
be helped out of that."

"Ah, poor creetur!" says Mrs. Bagnet.

"Then," says the trooper, not yet lighting his pipe, and passing 
his heavy hand over his hair, "that brought up Gridley in a man's 
mind.  His was a bad case too, in a different way.  Then the two 
got mixed up in a man's mind with a flinty old rascal who had to do 
with both.  And to think of that rusty carbine, stock and barrel, 
standing up on end in his corner, hard, indifferent, taking 
everything so evenly--it made flesh and blood tingle, I do assure 
you."

"My advice to you," returns Mrs. Bagnet, "is to light your pipe and 
tingle that way.  It's wholesomer and comfortabler, and better for 
the health altogether."

"You're right," says the trooper, "and I'll do it."

So he does it, though still with an indignant gravity that 
impresses the young Bagnets, and even causes Mr. Bagnet to defer 
the ceremony of drinking Mrs. Bagnet's health, always given by 
himself on these occasions in a speech of exemplary terseness.  But 
the young ladies having composed what Mr. Bagnet is in the habit of 
calling "the mixtur," and George's pipe being now in a glow, Mr. 
Bagnet considers it his duty to proceed to the toast of the 
evening.  He addresses the assembled company in the following 
terms.

"George.  Woolwich.  Quebec.  Malta.  This is her birthday.  Take a 
day's march.  And you won't find such another.  Here's towards 
her!"

The toast having been drunk with enthusiasm, Mrs. Bagnet returns 
thanks in a neat address of corresponding brevity.  This model 
composition is limited to the three words "And wishing yours!" 
which the old girl follows up with a nod at everybody in succession 
and a well-regulated swig of the mixture.  This she again follows 
up, on the present occasion, by the wholly unexpected exclamation, 
"Here's a man!"

Here IS a man, much to the astonishment of the little company, 
looking in at the parlour-door.  He is a sharp-eyed man--a quick 
keen man--and he takes in everybody's look at him, all at once, 
individually and collectively, in a manner that stamps him a 
remarkable man.

"George," says the man, nodding, "how do you find yourself?"

"Why, it's Bucket!" cries Mr. George.

"Yes," says the man, coming in and closing the door.  "I was going 
down the street here when I happened to stop and look in at the 
musical instruments in the shop-window--a friend of mine is in want 
of a second-hand wiolinceller of a good tone--and I saw a party 
enjoying themselves, and I thought it was you in the corner; I 
thought I couldn't be mistaken.  How goes the world with you, 
George, at the present moment?  Pretty smooth?  And with you, 
ma'am?  And with you, governor?  And Lord," says Mr. Bucket, 
opening his arms, "here's children too!  You may do anything with 
me if you only show me children.  Give us a kiss, my pets.  No 
occasion to inquire who YOUR father and mother is.  Never saw such 
a likeness in my life!"

Mr. Bucket, not unwelcome, has sat himself down next to Mr. George 
and taken Quebec and Malta on his knees.  "You pretty dears," says 
Mr. Bucket, "give us another kiss; it's the only thing I'm greedy 
in.  Lord bless you, how healthy you look!  And what may be the 
ages of these two, ma'am?  I should put 'em down at the figures of 
about eight and ten."

"You're very near, sir," says Mrs. Bagnet.

"I generally am near," returns Mr. Bucket, "being so fond of 
children.  A friend of mine has had nineteen of 'em, ma'am, all by 
one mother, and she's still as fresh and rosy as the morning.  Not 
so much so as yourself, but, upon my soul, she comes near you!  And 
what do you call these, my darling?" pursues Mr. Bucket, pinching 
Malta's cheeks.  "These are peaches, these are.  Bless your heart!  
And what do you think about father?  Do you think father could 
recommend a second-hand wiolinceller of a good tone for Mr. 
Bucket's friend, my dear?  My name's Bucket.  Ain't that a funny 
name?"

These blandishments have entirely won the family heart.  Mrs. 
Bagnet forgets the day to the extent of filling a pipe and a glass 
for Mr. Bucket and waiting upon him hospitably.  She would be glad 
to receive so pleasant a character under any circumstances, but she 
tells him that as a friend of George's she is particularly glad to 
see him this evening, for George has not been in his usual spirits.

"Not in his usual spirits?" exclaims Mr. Bucket.  "Why, I never 
heard of such a thing!  What's the matter, George?  You don't 
intend to tell me you've been out of spirits.  What should you be 
out of spirits for?  You haven't got anything on your mind, you 
know."

"Nothing particular," returns the trooper.

"I should think not," rejoins Mr. Bucket.  "What could you have on 
your mind, you know!  And have these pets got anything on THEIR 
minds, eh?  Not they, but they'll be upon the minds of some of the 
young fellows, some of these days, and make 'em precious low-
spirited.  I ain't much of a prophet, but I can tell you that, 
ma'am."

Mrs. Bagnet, quite charmed, hopes Mr. Bucket has a family of his 
own.

"There, ma'am!" says Mr. Bucket.  "Would you believe it?  No, I 
haven't.  My wife and a lodger constitute my family.  Mrs. Bucket 
is as fond of children as myself and as wishful to have 'em, but 
no.  So it is.  Worldly goods are divided unequally, and man must 
not repine.  What a very nice backyard, ma'am!  Any way out of that 
yard, now?"

There is no way out of that yard.

"Ain't there really?" says Mr. Bucket.  "I should have thought 
there might have been.  Well, I don't know as I ever saw a backyard 
that took my fancy more.  Would you allow me to look at it?  Thank 
you.  No, I see there's no way out.  But what a very good-
proportioned yard it is!"

Having cast his sharp eye all about it, Mr. Bucket returns to his 
chair next his friend Mr. George and pats Mr. George affectionately 
on the shoulder.

"How are your spirits now, George?"

"All right now," returns the trooper.

"That's your sort!" says Mr. Bucket.  "Why should you ever have 
been otherwise?  A man of your fine figure and constitution has no 
right to be out of spirits.  That ain't a chest to be out of 
spirits, is it, ma'am?  And you haven't got anything on your mind, 
you know, George; what could you have on your mind!"

Somewhat harping on this phrase, considering the extent and variety 
of his conversational powers, Mr. Bucket twice or thrice repeats it 
to the pipe he lights, and with a listening face that is 
particularly his own.  But the sun of his sociality soon recovers 
from this brief eclipse and shines again.

"And this is brother, is it, my dears?" says Mr. Bucket, referring 
to Quebec and Malta for information on the subject of young 
Woolwich.  "And a nice brother he is--half-brother I mean to say.  
For he's too old to be your boy, ma'am."

"I can certify at all events that he is not anybody else's," 
returns Mrs. Bagnet, laughing.

"Well, you do surprise me!  Yet he's like you, there's no denying.  
Lord, he's wonderfully like you!  But about what you may call the 
brow, you know, THERE his father comes out!"  Mr. Bucket compares 
the faces with one eye shut up, while Mr. Bagnet smokes in stolid 
satisfaction.

This is an opportunity for Mrs. Bagnet to inform him that the boy 
is George's godson.

"George's godson, is he?" rejoins Mr. Bucket with extreme 
cordiality.  "I must shake hands over again with George's godson.  
Godfather and godson do credit to one another.  And what do you 
intend to make of him, ma'am?  Does he show any turn for any 
musical instrument?"

Mr. Bagnet suddenly interposes, "Plays the fife.  Beautiful."

"Would you believe it, governor," says Mr. Bucket, struck by the 
coincidence, "that when I was a boy I played the fife myself?  Not 
in a scientific way, as I expect he does, but by ear.  Lord bless 
you!  'British Grenadiers'--there's a tune to warm an Englishman 
up!  COULD you give us 'British Grenadiers,' my fine fellow?"

Nothing could be more acceptable to the little circle than this 
call upon young Woolwich, who immediately fetches his fife and 
performs the stirring melody, during which performance Mr. Bucket, 
much enlivened, beats time and never falls to come in sharp with 
the burden, "British Gra-a-anadeers!"  In short, he shows so much 
musical taste that Mr. Bagnet actually takes his pipe from his lips 
to express his conviction that he is a singer.  Mr. Bucket receives 
the harmonious impeachment so modestly, confessing how that he did 
once chaunt a little, for the expression of the feelings of his own 
bosom, and with no presumptuous idea of entertaining his friends, 
that he is asked to sing.  Not to be behindhand in the sociality of 
the evening, he complies and gives them "Believe Me, if All Those 
Endearing Young Charms."  This ballad, he informs Mrs. Bagnet, he 
considers to have been his most powerful ally in moving the heart 
of Mrs. Bucket when a maiden, and inducing her to approach the 
altar--Mr. Bucket's own words are "to come up to the scratch."

This sparkling stranger is such a new and agreeable feature in the 
evening that Mr. George, who testified no great emotions of 
pleasure on his entrance, begins, in spite of himself, to be rather 
proud of him.  He is so friendly, is a man of so many resources, 
and so easy to get on with, that it is something to have made him 
known there.  Mr. Bagnet becomes, after another pipe, so sensible 
of the value of his acquaintance that he solicits the honour of his 
company on the old girl's next birthday.  If anything can more 
closely cement and consolidate the esteem which Mr. Bucket has 
formed for the family, it is the discovery of the nature of the 
occasion.  He drinks to Mrs. Bagnet with a warmth approaching to 
rapture, engages himself for that day twelvemonth more than 
thankfully, makes a memorandum of the day in a large black pocket-
book with a girdle to it, and breathes a hope that Mrs. Bucket and 
Mrs. Bagnet may before then become, in a manner, sisters.  As he 
says himself, what is public life without private ties?  He is in 
his humble way a public man, but it is not in that sphere that he 
finds happiness.  No, it must be sought within the confines of 
domestic bliss.

It is natural, under these circumstances, that he, in his turn, 
should remember the friend to whom he is indebted for so promising 
an acquaintance.  And he does.  He keeps very close to him.  
Whatever the subject of the conversation, he keeps a tender eye 
upon him.  He waits to walk home with him.  He is interested in his 
very boots and observes even them attentively as Mr. George sits 
smoking cross-legged in the chimney-corner.

At length Mr. George rises to depart.  At the same moment Mr. 
Bucket, with the secret sympathy of friendship, also rises.  He 
dotes upon the children to the last and remembers the commission he 
has undertaken for an absent friend.

"Respecting that second-hand wiolinceller, governor--could you 
recommend me such a thing?"

"Scores," says Mr. Bagnet.

"I am obliged to you," returns Mr. Bucket, squeezing his hand.  
"You're a friend in need.  A good tone, mind you!  My friend is a 
regular dab at it.  Ecod, he saws away at Mozart and Handel and the 
rest of the big-wigs like a thorough workman.  And you needn't," 
says Mr. Bucket in a considerate and private voice, "you needn't 
commit yourself to too low a figure, governor.  I don't want to pay 
too large a price for my friend, but I want you to have your proper 
percentage and be remunerated for your loss of time.  That is but 
fair.  Every man must live, and ought to it."

Mr. Bagnet shakes his head at the old girl to the effect that they 
have found a jewel of price.

"Suppose I was to give you a look in, say, at half arter ten to-
morrow morning.  Perhaps you could name the figures of a few 
wiolincellers of a good tone?" says Mr. Bucket.

Nothing easier.  Mr. and Mrs. Bagnet both engage to have the 
requisite information ready and even hint to each other at the 
practicability of having a small stock collected there for 
approval.

"Thank you," says Mr. Bucket, "thank you.  Good night, ma'am.  Good 
night, governor.  Good night, darlings.  I am much obliged to you 
for one of the pleasantest evenings I ever spent in my life."

They, on the contrary, are much obliged to him for the pleasure he 
has given them in his company; and so they part with many 
expressions of goodwill on both sides.  "Now George, old boy," says 
Mr. Bucket, taking his arm at the shop-door, "come along!"  As they 
go down the little street and the Bagnets pause for a minute 
looking after them, Mrs. Bagnet remarks to the worthy Lignum that 
Mr. Bucket "almost clings to George like, and seems to be really 
fond of him."

The neighbouring streets being narrow and ill-paved, it is a little 
inconvenient to walk there two abreast and arm in arm.  Mr. George 
therefore soon proposes to walk singly.  But Mr. Bucket, who cannot 
make up his mind to relinquish his friendly hold, replies, "Wait 
half a minute, George.  I should wish to speak to you first."  
Immediately afterwards, he twists him into a public-house and into 
a parlour, where he confronts him and claps his own back against 
the door.

"Now, George," says Mr. Bucket, "duty is duty, and friendship is 
friendship.  I never want the two to clash if I can help it.  I 
have endeavoured to make things pleasant to-night, and I put it to 
you whether I have done it or not.  You must consider yourself in 
custody, George."

"Custody?  What for?" returns the trooper, thunderstruck.

"Now, George," says Mr. Bucket, urging a sensible view of the case 
upon him with his fat forefinger, "duty, as you know very well, is 
one thing, and conversation is another.  It's my duty to inform you 
that any observations you may make will be liable to be used 
against you.  Therefore, George, be careful what you say.  You 
don't happen to have heard of a murder?"

"Murder!"

"Now, George," says Mr. Bucket, keeping his forefinger in an 
impressive state of action, "bear in mind what I've said to you.  I 
ask you nothing.  You've been in low spirits this afternoon.  I 
say, you don't happen to have heard of a murder?"

"No.  Where has there been a murder?"

"Now, George," says Mr. Bucket, "don't you go and commit yourself.  
I'm a-going to tell you what I want you for.  There has been a 
murder in Lincoln's Inn Fields--gentleman of the name of 
Tulkinghorn.  He was shot last night.  I want you for that."

The trooper sinks upon a seat behind him, and great drops start out 
upon his forehead, and a deadly pallor overspreads his face.

"Bucket!  It's not possible that Mr. Tulkinghorn has been killed 
and that you suspect ME?"

"George," returns Mr. Bucket, keeping his forefinger going, "it is 
certainly possible, because it's the case.  This deed was done last 
night at ten o'clock.  Now, you know where you were last night at 
ten o'clock, and you'll be able to prove it, no doubt."

"Last night!  Last night?" repeats the trooper thoughtfully.  Then 
it flashes upon him.  "Why, great heaven, I was there last night!"

"So I have understood, George," returns Mr. Bucket with great 
deliberation.  "So I have understood.  Likewise you've been very 
often there.  You've been seen hanging about the place, and you've 
been heard more than once in a wrangle with him, and it's possible
--I don't say it's certainly so, mind you, but it's possible--that 
he may have been heard to call you a threatening, murdering, 
dangerous fellow."

The trooper gasps as if he would admit it all if he could speak.

"Now, George," continues Mr. Bucket, putting his hat upon the table 
with an air of business rather in the upholstery way than 
otherwise, "my wish is, as it has been all the evening, to make 
things pleasant.  I tell you plainly there's a reward out, of a 
hundred guineas, offered by Sir Leicester Dedlock, Baronet.  You 
and me have always been pleasant together; but I have got a duty to 
discharge; and if that hundred guineas is to be made, it may as 
well be made by me as any other man.  On all of which accounts, I 
should hope it was clear to you that I must have you, and that I'm 
damned if I don't have you.  Am I to call in any assistance, or is 
the trick done?"

Mr. George has recovered himself and stands up like a soldier.  
"Come," he says; "I am ready."

"George," continues Mr. Bucket, "wait a bit!"  With his upholsterer 
manner, as if the trooper were a window to be fitted up, he takes 
from his pocket a pair of handcuffs.  "This is a serious charge, 
George, and such is my duty."

The trooper flushes angrily and hesitates a moment, but holds out 
his two hands, clasped together, and says, "There!  Put them on!"

Mr. Bucket adjusts them in a moment.  "How do you find them?  Are 
they comfortable?  If not, say so, for I wish to make things as 
pleasant as is consistent with my duty, and I've got another pair 
in my pocket."  This remark he offers like a most respectable 
tradesman anxious to execute an order neatly and to the perfect 
satisfaction of his customer.  "They'll do as they are?  Very well!  
Now, you see, George"--he takes a cloak from a corner and begins 
adjusting it about the trooper's neck--"I was mindful of your 
feelings when I come out, and brought this on purpose.  There!  
Who's the wiser?"

"Only I," returns the trooper, "but as I know it, do me one more 
good turn and pull my hat over my eyes."

"Really, though!  Do you mean it?  Ain't it a pity?  It looks so."

"I can't look chance men in the face with these things on," Mr. 
George hurriedly replies.  "Do, for God's sake, pull my hat 
forward."

So strongly entreated, Mr. Bucket complies, puts his own hat on, 
and conducts his prize into the streets, the trooper marching on as 
steadily as usual, though with his head less erect, and Mr. Bucket 
steering him with his elbow over the crossings and up the turnings.



CHAPTER L

Esther's Narrative


It happened that when I came home from Deal I found a note from 
Caddy Jellyby (as we always continued to call her), informing me 
that her health, which had been for some time very delicate, was 
worse and that she would be more glad than she could tell me if I 
would go to see her.  It was a note of a few lines, written from 
the couch on which she lay and enclosed to me in another from her 
husband, in which he seconded her entreaty with much solicitude.  
Caddy was now the mother, and I the godmother, of such a poor 
little baby--such a tiny old-faced mite, with a countenance that 
seemed to be scarcely anything but cap-border, and a little lean, 
long-fingered hand, always clenched under its chin.  It would lie 
in this attitude all day, with its bright specks of eyes open, 
wondering (as I used to imagine) how it came to be so small and 
weak.  Whenever it was moved it cried, but at all other times it 
was so patient that the sole desire of its life appeared to be to 
lie quiet and think.  It had curious little dark veins in its face 
and curious little dark marks under its eyes like faint 
remembrances of poor Caddy's inky days, and altogether, to those 
who were not used to it, it was quite a piteous little sight.

But it was enough for Caddy that SHE was used to it.  The projects 
with which she beguiled her illness, for little Esther's education, 
and little Esther's marriage, and even for her own old age as the 
grandmother of little Esther's little Esthers, was so prettily 
expressive of devotion to this pride of her life that I should be 
tempted to recall some of them but for the timely remembrance that 
I am getting on irregularly as it is.

To return to the letter.  Caddy had a superstition about me which 
had been strengthening in her mind ever since that night long ago 
when she had lain asleep with her head in my lap.  She almost--I 
think I must say quite--believed that I did her good whenever I was 
near her.  Now although this was such a fancy of the affectionate 
girl's that I am almost ashamed to mention it, still it might have 
all the force of a fact when she was really ill.  Therefore I set 
off to Caddy, with my guardian's consent, post-haste; and she and 
Prince made so much of me that there never was anything like it.

Next day I went again to sit with her, and next day I went again.  
It was a very easy journey, for I had only to rise a little earlier 
in the morning, and keep my accounts, and attend to housekeeping 
matters before leaving home.

But when I had made these three visits, my guardian said to me, on 
my return at night, "Now, little woman, little woman, this will 
never do.  Constant dropping will wear away a stone, and constant 
coaching will wear out a Dame Durden.  We will go to London for a 
while and take possession of our old lodgings."

"Not for me, dear guardian," said I, "for I never feel tired," 
which was strictly true.  I was only too happy to be in such 
request.

"For me then," returned my guardian, "or for Ada, or for both of 
us.  It is somebody's birthday to-morrow, I think."

"Truly I think it is," said I, kissing my darling, who would be 
twenty-one to-morrow.

"Well," observed my guardian, half pleasantly, half seriously, 
"that's a great occasion and will give my fair cousin some 
necessary business to transact in assertion of her independence, 
and will make London a more convenient place for all of us.  So to 
London we will go.  That being settled, there is another thing--how 
have you left Caddy?"

"Very unwell, guardian.  I fear it will be some time before she 
regains her health and strength."

"What do you call some time, now?" asked my guardian thoughtfully.

"Some weeks, I am afraid."

"Ah!"   He began to walk about the room with his hands in his 
pockets, showing that he had been thinking as much.  "Now, what do 
you say about her doctor?  Is he a good doctor, my love?"

I felt obliged to confess that I knew nothing to the contrary but 
that Prince and I had agreed only that evening that we would like 
his opinion to be confirmed by some one.

"Well, you know," returned my guardian quickly, "there's 
Woodcourt."

I had not meant that, and was rather taken by surprise.  For a 
moment all that I had had in my mind in connexion with Mr. 
Woodcourt seemed to come back and confuse me.

"You don't object to him, little woman?"

"Object to him, guardian?  Oh no!"

"And you don't think the patient would object to him?"

So far from that, I had no doubt of her being prepared to have a 
great reliance on him and to like him very much.  I said that he 
was no stranger to her personally, for she had seen him often in 
his kind attendance on Miss Flite.

"Very good," said my guardian.  "He has been here to-day, my dear, 
and I will see him about it to-morrow."

I felt in this short conversation--though I did not know how, for 
she was quiet, and we interchanged no look--that my dear girl well 
remembered how merrily she had clasped me round the waist when no 
other hands than Caddy's had brought me the little parting token.  
This caused me to feel that I ought to tell her, and Caddy too, 
that I was going to be the mistress of Bleak House and that if I 
avoided that disclosure any longer I might become less worthy in my 
own eyes of its master's love.  Therefore, when we went upstairs 
and had waited listening until the clock struck twelve in order 
that only I might be the first to wish my darling all good wishes 
on her birthday and to take her to my heart, I set before her, just 
as I had set before myself, the goodness and honour of her cousin 
John and the happy life that was in store for for me.  If ever my 
darling were fonder of me at one time than another in all our 
intercourse, she was surely fondest of me that night.  And I was so 
rejoiced to know it and so comforted by the sense of having done 
right in casting this last idle reservation away that I was ten 
times happier than I had been before.  I had scarcely thought it a 
reservation a few hours ago, but now that it was gone I felt as if 
I understood its nature better.

Next day we went to London.  We found our old lodging vacant, and 
in half an hour were quietly established there, as if we had never 
gone away.  Mr. Woodcourt dined with us to celebrate my darling's 
birthday, and we were as pleasant as we could be with the great 
blank among us that Richard's absence naturally made on such an 
occasion.  After that day I was for some weeks--eight or nine as I 
remember--very much with Caddy, and thus it fell out that I saw 
less of Ada at this time than any other since we had first come 
together, except the time of my own illness.  She often came to 
Caddy's, but our function there was to amuse and cheer her, and we 
did not talk in our usual confidential manner.  Whenever I went 
home at night we were together, but Caddy's rest was broken by 
pain, and I often remained to nurse her.

With her husband and her poor little mite of a baby to love and 
their home to strive for, what a good creature Caddy was!  So self-
denying, so uncomplaining, so anxious to get well on their account, 
so afraid of giving trouble, and so thoughtful of the unassisted 
labours of her husband and the comforts of old Mr. Turveydrop; I 
had never known the best of her until now.  And it seemed so 
curious that her pale face and helpless figure should be lying 
there day after day where dancing was the business of life, where 
the kit and the apprentices began early every morning in the ball-
room, and where the untidy little boy waltzed by himself in the 
kitchen all the afternoon.

At Caddy's request I took the supreme direction of her apartment, 
trimmed it up, and pushed her, couch and all, into a lighter and 
more airy and more cheerful corner than she had yet occupied; then, 
every day, when we were in our neatest array, I used to lay my 
small small namesake in her arms and sit down to chat or work or 
read to her.  It was at one of the first of these quiet times that 
I told Caddy about Bleak House.

We had other visitors besides Ada.  First of all we had Prince, who 
in his hurried intervals of teaching used to come softly in and sit 
softly down, with a face of loving anxiety for Caddy and the very 
little child.  Whatever Caddy's condition really was, she never 
failed to declare to Prince that she was all but well--which I, 
heaven forgive me, never failed to confirm.  This would put Prince 
in such good spirits that he would sometimes take the kit from his 
pocket and play a chord or two to astonish the baby, which I never 
knew it to do in the least degree, for my tiny namesake never 
noticed it at all.

Then there was Mrs. Jellyby.  She would come occasionally, with her 
usual distraught manner, and sit calmly looking miles beyond her 
grandchild as if her attention were absorbed by a young 
Borrioboolan on its native shores.  As bright-eyed as ever, as 
serene, and as untidy, she would say, "Well, Caddy, child, and how 
do you do to-day?"  And then would sit amiably smiling and taking 
no notice of the reply or would sweetly glide off into a 
calculation of the number of letters she had lately received and 
answered or of the coffee-bearing power of Borrioboola-Gha.  This 
she would always do with a serene contempt for our limited sphere 
of action, not to be disguised.

Then there was old Mr. Turveydrop, who was from morning to night 
and from night to morning the subject of innumerable precautions.  
If the baby cried, it was nearly stifled lest the noise should make 
him uncomfortable.  If the fire wanted stirring in the night, it 
was surreptitiously done lest his rest should be broken.  If Caddy 
required any little comfort that the house contained, she first 
carefully discussed whether he was likely to require it too.  In 
return for this consideration he would come into the room once a 
day, all but blessing it--showing a condescension, and a patronage, 
and a grace of manner in dispensing the light of his high-
shouldered presence from which I might have supposed him (if I had 
not known better) to have been the benefactor of Caddy's life.

"My Caroline," he would say, making the nearest approach that he 
could to bending over her.  "Tell me that you are better to-day."

"Oh, much better, thank you, Mr. Turveydrop," Caddy would reply.

"Delighted!  Enchanted!  And our dear Miss Summerson.  She is not 
qulte prostrated by fatigue?"  Here he would crease up his eyelids 
and kiss his fingers to me, though I am happy to say he had ceased 
to be particular in his attentions since I had been so altered.

"Not at all," I would assure him.

"Charming!  We must take care of our dear Caroline, Miss Summerson.  
We must spare nothing that will restore her.  We must nourish her.  
My dear Caroline"--he would turn to his daughter-in-law with 
infinite generosity and protection--"want for nothing, my love.  
Frame a wish and gratify it, my daughter.  Everything this house 
contains, everything my room contains, is at your service, my dear.  
Do not," he would sometimes add in a burst of deportment, "even 
allow my simple requirements to be considered if they should at any 
time interfere with your own, my Caroline.  Your necessities are 
greater than mine."

He had established such a long prescriptive right to this 
deportment (his son's inheritance from his mother) that I several 
times knew both Caddy and her husband to be melted to tears by 
these affectionate self-sacrifices.

"Nay, my dears," he would remonstrate; and when I saw Caddy's thin 
arm about his fat neck as he said it, I would be melted too, though 
not by the same process.  "Nay, nay!  I have promised never to 
leave ye.  Be dutiful and affectionate towards me, and I ask no 
other return.  Now, bless ye!  I am going to the Park."

He would take the air there presently and get an appetite for his 
hotel dinner.  I hope I do old Mr. Turveydrop no wrong, but I never 
saw any better traits in him than these I faithfully record, except 
that he certainly conceived a liking for Peepy and would take the 
child out walking with great pomp, always on those occasions 
sending him home before he went to dinner himself, and occasionally 
with a halfpenny in his pocket.  But even this disinterestedness 
was attended with no inconsiderable cost, to my knowledge, for 
before Peepy was sufficiently decorated to walk hand in hand with 
the professor of deportment, he had to be newly dressed, at the 
expense of Caddy and her husband, from top to toe.

Last of our visitors, there was Mr. Jellyby.  Really when he used 
to come in of an evening, and ask Caddy in his meek voice how she 
was, and then sit down with his head against the wall, and make no 
attempt to say anything more, I liked him very much.  If he found 
me bustling about doing any little thing, he sometimes half took 
his coat off, as if with an intention of helping by a great 
exertion; but he never got any further.  His sole occupation was to 
sit with his head against the wall, looking hard at the thoughtful 
baby; and I could not quite divest my mind of a fancy that they 
understood one another.

I have not counted Mr. Woodcourt among our visitors because he was 
now Caddy's regular attendant.  She soon began to improve under his 
care, but he was so gentle, so skilful, so unwearying in the pains 
he took that it is not to be wondered at, I am sure.  I saw a good 
deal of Mr. Woodcourt during this time, though not so much as might 
be supposed, for knowing Caddy to be safe in his hands, I often 
slipped home at about the hours when he was expected.  We 
frequently met, notwithstanding.  I was quite reconciled to myself 
now, but I still felt glad to think that he was sorry for me, and 
he still WAS sorry for me I believed.  He helped Mr. Badger in his 
professional engagements, which were numerous, and had as yet no 
settled projects for the future.

It was when Caddy began to recover that I began to notice a change 
in my dear girl.  I cannot say how it first presented itself to me, 
because I observed it in many slight particulars which were nothing 
in themselves and only became something when they were pieced 
together.  But I made it out, by putting them together, that Ada 
was not so frankly cheerful with me as she used to be.  Her 
tenderness for me was as loving and true as ever; I did not for a 
moment doubt that; but there was a quiet sorrow about her which she 
did not confide to me, and in which I traced some hidden regret.

Now, I could not understand this, and I was so anxious for the 
happiness of my own pet that it caused me some uneasiness and set 
me thinking often.  At length, feeling sure that Ada suppressed 
this something from me lest it should make me unhappy too, it came 
into my head that she was a little grieved--for me--by what I had 
told her about Bleak House.

How I persuaded myself that this was likely, I don't know.  I had 
no idea that there was any selfish reference in my doing so.  I was 
not grieved for myself: I was quite contented and quite happy.  
Still, that Ada might be thinking--for me, though I had abandoned 
all such thoughts--of what once was, but was now all changed, 
seemed so easy to believe that I believed it.

What could I do to reassure my darling (I considered then) and show 
her that I had no such feelings?  Well! I could only be as brisk 
and busy as possible, and that I had tried to be all along.  
However, as Caddy's illness had certainly interfered, more or less, 
with my home duties--though I had always been there in the morning 
to make my guardian's breakfast, and he had a hundred times laughed 
and said there must be two little women, for his little woman was 
never missing--I resolved to be doubly diligent and gay.  So I went 
about the house humming all the tunes I knew, and I sat working and 
working in a desperate manner, and I talked and talked, morning, 
noon, and night.

And still there was the same shade between me and my darling.

"So, Dame Trot," observed my guardian, shutting up his book one 
night when we were all three together, "so Woodcourt has restored 
Caddy Jellyby to the full enjoyment of life again?"

"Yes," I said; "and to be repaid by such gratitude as hers is to be 
made rich, guardian."

"I wish it was," he returned, "with all my heart."

So did I too, for that matter.  I said so.

"Aye! We would make him as rich as a Jew if we knew how.  Would we 
not, little woman?"

I laughed as I worked and replied that I was not sure about that, 
for it might spoil him, and he might not be so useful, and there 
might be many who could ill spare him.  As Miss Flite, and Caddy 
herself, and many others.

"True," said my guardian.  "I had forgotten that.  But we would 
agree to make him rich enough to live, I suppose?  Rich enough to 
work with tolerable peace of mind?  Rich enough to have his own 
happy home and his own household gods--and household goddess, too, 
perhaps?"

That was quite another thing, I said.  We must all agree in that.

"To be sure," said my guardian.  "All of us.  I have a great regard 
for Woodcourt, a high esteem for him; and I have been sounding him 
delicately about his plans.  It is difficult to offer aid to an 
independent man with that just kind of pride which he possesses.  
And yet I would be glad to do it if I might or if I knew how.  He 
seems half inclined for another voyage.  But that appears like 
casting such a man away."

"It might open a new world to him," said I.

''So it might, little woman," my guardian assented.  ''I doubt if 
he expects much of the old world.  Do you know I have fancied that 
he sometimes feels some particular disappointment or misfortune 
encountered in it.  You never heard of anything of that sort?"

I shook my head.

"Humph," said my guardian.  "I am mistaken, I dare say."  As there 
was a little pause here, which I thought, for my dear girl's 
satisfaction, had better be filled up, I hummed an air as I worked 
which was a favourite with my guardian.

"And do you think Mr. Woodcourt will make another voyage?" I asked 
him when I had hummed it quietly all through.

"I don't quite know what to think, my dear, but I should say it was 
likely at present that he will give a long trip to another 
country."

"I am sure he will take the best wishes of all our hearts with him 
wherever he goes," said I; "and though they are not riches, he will 
never be the poorer for them, guardian, at least."

"Never, little woman," he replied.

I was sitting in my usual place, which was now beside my guardian's 
chair.  That had not been my usual place before the letter, but it 
was now.  I looked up to Ada, who was sitting opposite, and I saw, 
as she looked at me, that her eyes were filled with tears and that 
tears were falling down her face.  I felt that I had only to be 
placid and merry once for all to undeceive my dear and set her 
loving heart at rest.  I really was so, and I had nothing to do but 
to be myself.

So I made my sweet girl lean upon my shoulder--how little thinking 
what was heavy on her mind!--and I said she was not quite well, and 
put my arm about her, and took her upstairs.  When we were in our 
own room, and when she might perhaps have told me what I was so 
unprepared to hear, I gave her no encouragement to confide in me; I 
never thought she stood in need of it.

"Oh, my dear good Esther," said Ada, "if I could only make up my 
mind to speak to you and my cousin John when you are together!"

"Why, my love!" I remonstrated.  "Ada, why should you not speak to 
us!"

Ada only dropped her head and pressed me closer to her heart.

"You surely don't forget, my beauty," said I, smiling, "what quiet, 
old-fashioned people we are and how I have settled down to be the 
discreetest of dames?  You don't forget how happily and peacefully 
my life is all marked out for me, and by whom?  I am certain that 
you don't forget by what a noble character, Ada.  That can never 
be."

"No, never, Esther."

"Why then, my dear," said I, "there can be nothing amiss--and why 
should you not speak to us?"

"Nothing amiss, Esther?" returned Ada.  "Oh, when I think of all 
these years, and of his fatherly care and kindness, and of the old 
relations among us, and of you, what shall I do, what shall I do!"

I looked at my child in some wonder, but I thought it better not to 
answer otherwise than by cheering her, and so I turned off into 
many little recollections of our life together and prevented her 
from saying more.  When she lay down to sleep, and not before, I 
returned to my guardian to say good night, and then I came back to 
Ada and sat near her for a little while.

She was asleep, and I thought as I looked at her that she was a 
little changed.  I had thought so more than once lately.  I could 
not decide, even looking at her while she was unconscious, how she 
was changed, but something in the familiar beauty of her face 
looked different to me.  My guardian's old hopes of her and Richard 
arose sorrowfully in my mind, and I said to myself, "She has been 
anxious about him," and I wondered how that love would end.

When I had come home from Caddy's while she was ill, I had often 
found Ada at work, and she had always put her work away, and I had 
never known what it was.  Some of it now lay in a drawer near her, 
which was not quite closed.  I did not open the drawer, but I still 
rather wondered what the work could he, for it was evidently 
nothing for herself.

And I noticed as I kissed my dear that she lay with one hand under 
her pillow so that it was hidden.

How much less amiable I must have been than they thought me, how 
much less amiable than I thought myself, to be so preoccupied with 
my own cheerfulness and contentment as to think that it only rested 
with me to put my dear girl right and set her mind at peace!

But I lay down, self-deceived, in that belief.  And I awoke in it 
next day to find that there was still the same shade between me and 
my darling.



CHAPTER LI

Enlightened


When Mr. Woodcourt arrived in London, he went, that very same day, 
to Mr. Vholes's in Symond's Inn.  For he never once, from the 
moment when I entreated him to be a friend to Richard, neglected or 
forgot his promise.  He had told me that he accepted the charge as 
a sacred trust, and he was ever true to it in that spirit.

He found Mr. Vholes in his office and informed Mr. Vholes of his 
agreement with Richard that he should call there to learn his 
address.

"Just so, sir," said Mr. Vholes.  "Mr. C.'s address is not a 
hundred miles from here, sir, Mr. C.'s address is not a hundred 
miles from here.  Would you take a seat, sir?"

Mr. Woodcourt thanked Mr. Vholes, but he had no business with him 
beyond what he had mentioned.

"Just so, sir.  I believe, sir," said Mr. Vholes, still quietly 
insisting on the seat by not giving the address, "that you have 
influence with Mr. C.  Indeed I am aware that you have."

"I was not aware of it myself," returned Mr. Woodcourt; "but I 
suppose you know best."

"Sir," rejoined Mr. Vholes, self-contained as usual, voice and all, 
"it is a part of my professional duty to know best.  It is a part 
of my professional duty to study and to understand a gentleman who 
confides his interests to me.  In my professional duty I shall not 
be wanting, sir, if I know it.  I may, with the best intentions, be 
wanting in it without knowing it; but not if I know it, sir."

Mr. Woodcourt again mentioned the address.

"Give me leave, sir," said Mr. Vholes.  "Bear with me for a moment.  
Sir, Mr. C. is playing for a considerable stake, and cannot play 
without--need I say what?"

"Money, I presume?"

"Sir," said Mr. Vholes, "to be honest with you (honesty being my 
golden rule, whether I gain by it or lose, and I find that I 
generally lose), money is the word.  Now, sir, upon the chances of 
Mr. C.'s game I express to you no opinion, NO opinion.  It might be 
highly impolitic in Mr. C., after playing so long and so high, to 
leave off; it might be the reverse; I say nothing.  No, sir," said 
Mr. Vholes, bringing his hand flat down upon his desk in a positive 
manner, "nothing."

"You seem to forget," returned Mr, Woodcourt, "that I ask you to 
say nothing and have no interest in anything you say."

"Pardon me, sir!" retorted Mr. Vholes.  "You do yourself an 
injustice.  No, sir!  Pardon me!  You shall not--shall not in my 
office, if I know it--do yourself an injustice.  You are interested 
in anything, and in everything, that relates to your friend.  I 
know human nature much better, sir, than to admit for an instant 
that a gentleman of your appearance is not interested in whatever 
concerns his friend."

"Well," replied Mr. Woodcourt, "that may be.  I am particularly 
interested in his address."

"The number, sir," said Mr. Vholes parenthetically, "I believe I 
have already mentioned.  If Mr. C. is to continue to play for this 
considerable stake, sir, he must have funds.  Understand me!  There 
are funds in hand at present.  I ask for nothing; there are funds 
in hand.  But for the onward play, more funds must be provided, 
unless Mr. C. is to throw away what he has already ventured, which 
is wholly and solely a point for his consideration.  This, sir, I 
take the opportunity of stating openly to you as the friend of Mr. 
C.  Without funds I shall always be happy to appear and act for Mr. 
C. to the extent of all such costs as are safe to be allowed out of 
the estate, not beyond that.  I could not go beyond that, sir, 
without wronging some one.  I must either wrong my three dear girls 
or my venerable father, who is entirely dependent on me, in the 
Vale of Taunton; or some one.  Whereas, sir, my resolution is (call 
it weakness or folly if you please) to wrong no one."

Mr. Woodcourt rather sternly rejoined that he was glad to hear it.

"I wish, sir," said Mr. Vholes, "to leave a good name behind me.  
Therefore I take every opportunity of openly stating to a friend of 
Mr. C. how Mr. C. is situated.  As to myself, sir, the labourer is 
worthy of his hire.  If I undertake to put my shoulder to the 
wheel, I do it, and I earn what I get.  I am here for that purpose.  
My name is painted on the door outside, with that object."

"And Mr. Carstone's address, Mr. Vholes?"

"Sir," returned Mr. Vholes, "as I believe I have already mentioned, 
it is next door.  On the second story you will find Mr. C.'s 
apartments.  Mr. C. desires to be near his professional adviser, 
and I am far from objecting, for I court inquiry."

Upon this Mr. Woodcourt wished Mr. Vholes good day and went in 
search of Richard, the change in whose appearance he began to 
understand now but too well.

He found him in a dull room, fadedly furnished, much as I had found 
him in his barrack-room but a little while before, except that he 
was not writing but was sitting with a book before him, from which 
his eyes and thoughts were far astray.  As the door chanced to be 
standing open, Mr. Woodcourt was in his presence for some moments 
without being perceived, and he told me that he never could forget 
the haggardness of his face and the dejection of his manner before 
he was aroused from his dream.

"Woodcourt, my dear fellow," cried Richard, starting up with 
extended hands, "you come upon my vision like a ghost."

"A friendly one," he replied, "and only waiting, as they say ghosts 
do, to be addressed.  How does the mortal world go?"  They were 
seated now, near together.

"Badly enough, and slowly enough," said Richard, "speaking at least 
for my part of it."

"What part is that?"

"The Chancery part."

"I never heard," returned Mr. Woodcourt, shaking his head, "of its 
going well yet."

"Nor I," said Richard moodily.  "Who ever did?"  He brightened 
again in a moment and said with his natural openness, "Woodcourt, I 
should be sorry to be misunderstood by you, even if I gained by it 
in your estimation.  You must know that I have done no good this 
long time.  I have not intended to do much harm, but I seem to have 
been capable of nothing else.  It may be that I should have done 
better by keeping out of the net into which my destiny has worked 
me, but I think not, though I dare say you will soon hear, if you 
have not already heard, a very different opinion.  To make short of 
a long story, I am afraid I have wanted an object; but I have an 
object now--or it has me--and it is too late to discuss it.  Take 
me as I am, and make the best of me."

"A bargain," said Mr. Woodcourt.  "Do as much by me in return."

"Oh!  You," returned Richard, "you can pursue your art for its own 
sake, and can put your hand upon the plough and never turn, and can 
strike a purpose out of anything.  You and I are very different 
creatures."

He spoke regretfully and lapsed for a moment into his weary 
condition.

"Well, well!" he cried, shaking it off.  "Everything has an end.  
We shall see!  So you will take me as I am, and make the best of 
me?"

"Aye!  Indeed I will."  They shook hands upon it laughingly, but in 
deep earnestness.  I can answer for one of them with my heart of 
hearts.

"You come as a godsend," said Richard, "for I have seen nobody here 
yet but Vholes.  Woodcourt, there is one subject I should like to 
mention, for once and for all, in the beginning of our treaty.  You 
can hardly make the best of me if I don't.  You know, I dare say, 
that I have an attachment to my cousin Ada?"

Mr. Woodcourt replied that I had hinted as much to him.  "Now 
pray," returned Richard, "don't think me a heap of selfishness.  
Don't suppose that I am splitting my head and half breaking my 
heart over this miserable Chancery suit for my own rights and 
interests alone.  Ada's are bound up with mine; they can't be 
separated; Vholes works for both of us.  Do think of that!"

He was so very solicitous on this head that Mr. Woodcourt gave him 
the strongest assurances that he did him no injustice.

"You see," said Richard, with something pathetic in his manner of 
lingering on the point, though it was off-hand and unstudied, "to 
an upright fellow like you, bringing a friendly face like yours 
here, I cannot bear the thought of appearing selfish and mean.  I 
want to see Ada righted, Woodcourt, as well as myself; I want to do 
my utmost to right her, as well as myself; I venture what I can 
scrape together to extricate her, as well as myself.  Do, I beseech 
you, think of that!"

Afterwards, when Mr. Woodcourt came to reflect on what had passed, 
he was so very much impressed by the strength of Richard's anxiety 
on this point that in telling me generally of his first visit to 
Symond's Inn he particularly dwelt upon it.  It revived a fear I 
had had before that my dear girl's little property would be 
absorbed by Mr. Vholes and that Richard's justification to himself 
would be sincerely this.  It was just as I began to take care of 
Caddy that the interview took place, and I now return to the time 
when Caddy had recovered and the shade was still between me and my 
darling.

I proposed to Ada that morning that we should go and see Richard.  
It a little surprised me to find that she hesitated and was not so 
radiantly willing as I had expected.

"My dear," said I, "you have not had any difference with Richard 
since I have been so much away?"

"No, Esther."

"Not heard of him, perhaps?" said I.

"Yes, I have heard of him," said Ada.

Such tears in her eyes, and such love in her face.  I could not 
make my darling out.  Should I go to Richard's by myself? I said.  
No, Ada thought I had better not go by myself.  Would she go with 
me?  Yes, Ada thought she had better go with me.  Should we go now?  
Yes, let us go now.  Well, I could not understand my darling, with 
the tears in her eyes and the love in her face!

We were soon equipped and went out.  It was a sombre day, and drops 
of chill rain fell at intervals.  It was one of those colourless 
days when everything looks heavy and harsh.  The houses frowned at 
us, the dust rose at us, the smoke swooped at us, nothing made any 
compromise about itself or wore a softened aspect.  I fancied my 
beautiful girl quite out of place in the rugged streets, and I 
thought there were more funerals passing along the dismal pavements 
than I had ever seen before.

We had first to find out Symond's Inn.  We were going to inquire in 
a shop when Ada said she thought it was near Chancery Lane.  "We 
are not likely to be far out, my love, if we go in that direction," 
said I.  So to Chancery Lane we went, and there, sure enough, we 
saw it written up.  Symond's Inn.

We had next to find out the number.  "Or Mr. Vholes's office will 
do," I recollected, "for Mr. Vholes's office is next door."  Upon 
which Ada said, perhaps that was Mr. Vholes's office in the corner 
there.  And it really was.

Then came the question, which of the two next doors?  I was going 
for the one, and my darling was going for the other; and my darling 
was right again.  So up we went to the second story, when we came 
to Richard's name in great white letters on a hearse-like panel.

I should have knocked, but Ada said perhaps we had better turn the 
handle and go in.  Thus we came to Richard, poring over a table 
covered with dusty bundles of papers which seemed to me like dusty 
mirrors reflecting his own mind.  Wherever I looked I saw the 
ominous words that ran in it repeated.  Jarndyce and Jarndyce.

He received us very affectionately, and we sat down.  "If you had 
come a little earlier," he said, "you would have found Woodcourt 
here.  There never was such a good fellow as Woodcourt is.  He 
finds time to look in between-whiles, when anybody else with half 
his work to do would be thinking about not being able to come.  And 
he is so cheery, so fresh, so sensible, so earnest, so--everything 
that I am not, that the place brightens whenever he comes, and 
darkens whenever he goes again."

"God bless him," I thought, "for his truth to me!"

"He is not so sanguine, Ada," continued Richard, casting his 
dejected look over the bundles of papers, "as Vholes and I are 
usually, but he is only an outsider and is not in the mysteries.  
We have gone into them, and he has not.  He can't be expected to 
know much of such a labyrinth."

As his look wandered over the papers again and he passed his two 
hands over his head, I noticed how sunken and how large his eyes 
appeared, how dry his lips were, and how his finger-nails were all 
bitten away.

"Is this a healthy place to live in, Richard, do you think?" said I.

"Why, my dear Minerva," answered Richard with his old gay laugh, 
"it is neither a rural nor a cheerful place; and when the sun 
shines here, you may lay a pretty heavy wager that it is shining 
brightly in an open spot.  But it's well enough for the time.  It's 
near the offices and near Vholes."

"Perhaps," I hinted, "a change from both--"

"Might do me good?" said Richard, forcing a laugh as he finished 
the sentence.  "I shouldn't wonder!  But it can only come in one 
way now--in one of two ways, I should rather say.  Either the suit 
must be ended, Esther, or the suitor.  But it shall be the suit, my 
dear girl, the suit, my dear girl!"

These latter words were addressed to Ada, who was sitting nearest 
to him.  Her face being turned away from me and towards him, I 
could not see it.

"We are doing very well," pursued Richard.  "Vholes will tell you 
so.  We are really spinning along.  Ask Vholes.  We are giving them 
no rest.  Vholes knows all their windings and turnings, and we are 
upon them everywhere.  We have astonished them already.  We shall 
rouse up that nest of sleepers, mark my words!"

His hopefulness had long been more painful to me than his 
despondency; it was so unlike hopefulness, had something so fierce 
in its determination to be it, was so hungry and eager, and yet so 
conscious of being forced and unsustainable that it had long 
touched me to the heart.  But the commentary upon it now indelibly 
written in his handsome face made it far more distressing than it 
used to be.  I say indelibly, for I felt persuaded that if the 
fatal cause could have been for ever terminated, according to his 
brightest visions, in that same hour, the traces of the premature 
anxiety, self-reproach, and disappointment it had occasioned him 
would have remained upon his features to the hour of his death.

"The sight of our dear little woman," said Richard, Ada still 
remaining silent and quiet, "is so natural to me, and her 
compassionate face is so like the face of old days--"

Ah!  No, no.  I smiled and shook my head.

"--So exactly like the face of old days," said Richard in his 
cordial voice, and taking my hand with the brotherly regard which 
nothing ever changed, "that I can't make pretences with her.  I 
fluctuate a little; that's the truth.  Sometimes I hope, my dear, 
and sometimes I--don't quite despair, but nearly.  I get," said 
Richard, relinquishing my hand gently and walking across the room, 
"so tired!"

He took a few turns up and down and sunk upon the sofa.  "I get," 
he repeated gloomily, "so tired.  It is such weary, weary work!"

He was leaning on his arm saying these words in a meditative voice 
and looking at the ground when my darling rose, put off her bonnet, 
kneeled down beside him with her golden hair falling like sunlight 
on his head, clasped her two arms round his neck, and turned her 
face to me.  Oh, what a loving and devoted face I saw!

"Esther, dear," she said very quietly, "I am not going home again."

A light shone in upon me all at once.

"Never any more.  I am going to stay with my dear husband.  We have 
been married above two months.  Go home without me, my own Esther; 
I shall never go home any more!"  With those words my darling drew 
his head down on her breast and held it there.  And if ever in my 
life I saw a love that nothing but death could change, I saw it 
then before me.

"Speak to Esther, my dearest," said Richard, breaking the silence 
presently.  "Tell her how it was."

I met her before she could come to me and folded her in my arms.  
We neither of us spoke, but with her cheek against my own I wanted 
to hear nothing.  "My pet," said I.  "My love.  My poor, poor 
girl!"  I pitied her so much.  I was very fond of Richard, but the 
impulse that I had upon me was to pity her so much.

"Esther, will you forgive me?  Will my cousin John forgive me?"

"My dear," said I, "to doubt it for a moment is to do him a great 
wrong.  And as to me!"  Why, as to me, what had I to forgive!

I dried my sobbing darling's eyes and sat beside her on the sofa, 
and Richard sat on my other side; and while I was reminded of that 
so different night when they had first taken me into their 
confidence and had gone on in their own wild happy way, they told 
me between them how it was.

"All I had was Richard's," Ada said; "and Richard would not take 
it, Esther, and what could I do but be his wife when I loved him 
dearly!"

"And you were so fully and so kindly occupied, excellent Dame 
Durden," said Richard, "that how could we speak to you at such a 
time!  And besides, it was not a long-considered step.  We went out 
one morning and were married."

"And when it was done, Esther," said my darling, "I was always 
thinking how to tell you and what to do for the best.  And 
sometimes I thought you ought to know it directly, and sometimes I 
thought you ought not to know it and keep it from my cousin John; 
and I could not tell what to do, and I fretted very much."

How selfish I must have been not to have thought of this before!  I 
don't know what I said now.  I was so sorry, and yet I was so fond 
of them and so glad that they were fond of me; I pitied them so 
much, and yet I felt a kind of pride in their loving one another.  
I never had experienced such painful and pleasurable emotion at one 
time, and in my own heart I did not know which predominated.  But I 
was not there to darken their way; I did not do that.

When I was less foolish and more composed, my darling took her 
wedding-ring from her bosom, and kissed it, and put it on.  Then I 
remembered last night and told Richard that ever since her marriage 
she had worn it at night when there was no one to see.  Then Ada 
blushingly asked me how did I know that, my dear.  Then I told Ada 
how I had seen her hand concealed under her pillow and had little 
thought why, my dear.  Then they began telling me how it was all 
over again, and I began to be sorry and glad again, and foolish 
again, and to hide my plain old face as much as I could lest I 
should put them out of heart.

Thus the time went on until it became necessary for me to think of 
returning.  When that time arrived it was the worst of all, for 
then my darling completely broke down.  She clung round my neck, 
calling me by every dear name she could think of and saying what 
should she do without me!  Nor was Richard much better; and as for 
me, I should have been the worst of the three if I had not severely 
said to myself, "Now Esther, if you do, I'll never speak to you 
again!"

"Why, I declare," said I, "I never saw such a wife.  I don't think 
she loves her husband at all.  Here, Richard, take my child, for 
goodness' sake."  But I held her tight all the while, and could 
have wept over her I don't know how long.

"I give this dear young couple notice," said I, "that I am only 
going away to come back to-morrow and that I shall be always coming 
backwards and forwards until Symond's Inn is tired of the sight of 
me.  So I shall not say good-bye, Richard.  For what would be the 
use of that, you know, when I am coming back so soon!"

I had given my darling to him now, and I meant to go; but I 
lingered for one more look of the precious face which it seemed to 
rive my heart to turn from.

So I said (in a merry, bustling manner) that unless they gave me 
some encouragement to come back, I was not sure that I could take 
that liberty, upon which my dear girl looked up, faintly smiling 
through her tears, and I folded her lovely face between my hands, 
and gave it one last kiss, and laughed, and ran away.

And when I got downstairs, oh, how I cried!  It almost seemed to me 
that I had lost my Ada for ever.  I was so lonely and so blank 
without her, and it was so desolate to be going home with no hope 
of seeing her there, that I could get no comfort for a little while 
as I walked up and down in a dim corner sobbing and crying.

I came to myself by and by, after a little scolding, and took a 
coach home.  The poor boy whom I had found at St. Albans had 
reappeared a short time before and was lying at the point of death; 
indeed, was then dead, though I did not know it.  My guardian had 
gone out to inquire about him and did not return to dinner.  Being 
quite alone, I cried a little again, though on the whole I don't 
think I behaved so very, very ill.

It was only natural that I should not be quite accustomed to the 
loss of my darling yet.  Three or four hours were not a long time 
after years.  But my mind dwelt so much upon the uncongenial scene 
in which I had left her, and I pictured it as such an overshadowed 
stony-hearted one, and I so longed to be near her and taking some 
sort of care of her, that I determined to go back in the evening 
only to look up at her windows.

It was foolish, I dare say, but it did not then seem at all so to 
me, and it does not seem quite so even now.  I took Charley into my 
confidence, and we went out at dusk.  It was dark when we came to 
the new strange home of my dear girl, and there was a light behind 
the yellow blinds.  We walked past cautiously three or four times, 
looking up, and narrowly missed encountering Mr. Vholes, who came 
out of his office while we were there and turned his head to look 
up too before going home.  The sight of his lank black figure and 
the lonesome air of that nook in the dark were favourable to the 
state of my mind.  I thought of the youth and love and beauty of my 
dear girl, shut up in such an ill-assorted refuge, almost as if it 
were a cruel place.

It was very solitary and very dull, and I did not doubt that I 
might safely steal upstairs.  I left Charley below and went up with 
a light foot, not distressed by any glare from the feeble oil 
lanterns on the way.  I listened for a few moments, and in the 
musty rotting silence of the house believed that I could hear the 
murmur of their young voices.  I put my lips to the hearse-like 
panel of the door as a kiss for my dear and came quietly down 
again, thinking that one of these days I would confess to the 
visit.

And it really did me good, for though nobody but Charley and I knew 
anything about it, I somehow felt as if it had diminished the 
separation between Ada and me and had brought us together again for 
those moments.  I went back, not quite accustomed yet to the 
change, but all the better for that hovering about my darling.

My guardian had come home and was standing thoughtfully by the dark 
window.  When I went in, his face cleared and he came to his seat, 
but he caught the light upon my face as I took mine.

"Little woman," said he, "You have been crying."

"Why, yes, guardian," said I, "I am afraid I have been, a little.  
Ada has been in such distress, and is so very sorry, guardian."

I put my arm on the back of his chair, and I saw in his glance that 
my words and my look at her empty place had prepared him.

"Is she married, my dear?"

I told him all about it and how her first entreaties had referred 
to his forgiveness.

"She has no need of it," said he.  "Heaven bless her and her 
husband!"  But just as my first impulse had been to pity her, so 
was his.  "Poor girl, poor girl!  Poor Rick!  Poor Ada!"

Neither of us spoke after that, until he said with a sigh, "Well, 
well, my dear!  Bleak House is thinning fast."

"But its mistress remains, guardian."  Though I was timid about 
saying it, I ventured because of the sorrowful tone in which he had 
spoken.  "She will do all she can to make it happy," said I.

"She will succeed, my love!"

The letter had made no difference between us except that the seat 
by his side had come to be mine; it made none now.  He turned his 
old bright fatherly look upon me, laid his hand on my hand in his 
old way, and said again, "She will succeed, my dear.  Nevertheless, 
Bleak House is thinning fast, O little woman!"

I was sorry presently that this was all we said about that.  I was 
rather disappointed.  I feared I might not quite have been all I 
had meant to be since the letter and the answer.



CHAPTER LII

Obstinacy


But one other day had intervened when, early in the morning as we 
were going to breakfast, Mr. Woodcourt came in haste with the 
astounding news that a terrible murder had been committed for which 
Mr. George had been apprehended and was in custody.  When he told 
us that a large reward was offered by Sir Leicester Dedlock for the 
murderer's apprehension, I did not in my first consternation 
understand why; but a few more words explained to me that the 
murdered person was Sir Leicester's lawyer, and immediately my 
mother's dread of him rushed into my remembrance.

This unforeseen and violent removal of one whom she had long 
watched and distrusted and who had long watched and distrusted her, 
one for whom she could have had few intervals of kindness, always 
dreading in him a dangerous and secret enemy, appeared so awful 
that my first thoughts were of her.  How appalling to hear of such 
a death and be able to feel no pity!  How dreadful to remember, 
perhaps, that she had sometimes even wished the old man away who 
was so swiftly hurried out of life!

Such crowding reflections, increasing the distress and fear I 
always felt when the name was mentioned, made me so agitated that I 
could scarcely hold my place at the table.  I was quite unable to 
follow the conversation until I had had a little time to recover.  
But when I came to myself and saw how shocked my guardian was and 
found that they were earnestly speaking of the suspected man and 
recalling every favourable impression we had formed of him out of 
the good we had known of him, my interest and my fears were so 
strongly aroused in his behalf that I was quite set up again.

"Guardian, you don't think it possible that he is justly accused?"

"My dear, I CAN'T think so.  This man whom we have seen so open-
hearted and compassionate, who with the might of a giant has the 
gentleness of a child, who looks as brave a fellow as ever lived 
and is so simple and quiet with it, this man justly accused of such 
a crime?  I can't believe it.  It's not that I don't or I won't.  I 
can't!"

"And I can't," said Mr. Woodcourt.  "Still, whatever we believe or 
know of him, we had better not forget that some appearances are 
against him.  He bore an animosity towards the deceased gentleman.  
He has openly mentioned it in many places.  He is said to have 
expressed himself violently towards him, and he certainly did about 
him, to my knowledge.  He admits that he was alone on the scene of 
the murder within a few minutes of its commission.  I sincerely 
believe him to be as innocent of any participation in it as I am, 
but these are all reasons for suspicion falling upon him."

"True," said my guardian.  And he added, turning to me, "It would 
be doing him a very bad service, my dear, to shut our eyes to the 
truth in any of these respects."

I felt, of course, that we must admit, not only to ourselves but to 
others, the full force of the circumstances against him.  Yet I 
knew withal (I could not help saying) that their weight would not 
induce us to desert him in his need.

"Heaven forbid!" returned my guardian.  "We will stand by him, as 
he himself stood by the two poor creatures who are gone."  He meant 
Mr. Gridley and the boy, to both of whom Mr. George had given 
shelter.

Mr. Woodcourt then told us that the trooper's man had been with him 
before day, after wandering about the streets all night like a 
distracted creature.  That one of the trooper's first anxieties was 
that we should not suppose him guilty.  That he had charged his 
messenger to represent his perfect innocence with every solemn 
assurance be could send us.  That Mr. Woodcourt had only quieted 
the man by undertaking to come to our house very early in the 
morning with these representations.  He added that he was now upon 
his way to see the prisoner himself.

My guardian said directly he would go too.  Now, besides that I 
liked the retired soldier very much and that he liked me, I had 
that secret interest in what had happened which was only known to 
my guardian.  I felt as if it came close and near to me.  It seemed 
to become personally important to myself that the truth should be 
discovered and that no innocent people should be suspected, for 
suspicion, once run wild, might run wilder.

In a word, I felt as if it were my duty and obligation to go with 
them.  My guardian did not seek to dissuade me, and I went.

It was a large prison with many courts and passages so like one 
another and so uniformly paved that I seemed to gain a new 
comprehension, as I passed along, of the fondness that solitary 
prisoners, shut up among the same staring walls from year to year, 
have had--as I have read--for a weed or a stray blade of grass.  In 
an arched room by himself, like a cellar upstairs, with walls so 
glaringly white that they made the massive iron window-bars and 
iron-bound door even more profoundly black than they were, we found 
the trooper standing in a corner.  He had been sitting on a bench 
there and had risen when he heard the locks and bolts turn.

When he saw us, he came forward a step with his usual heavy tread, 
and there stopped and made a slight bow.  But as I still advanced, 
putting out my